My fellow Americans: Four years ago, we launched a great national effort to rebuild our country, to renew its spirit, and to restore the allegiance of this government to its citizens. In short, we embarked on a mission to make America great again — for all Americans.As I conclude my term as the 45th President of the United States, I stand before you truly proud of what we have achieved together. We did what we came here to do — and so much more.This week, we inaugurate a new administration and pray for its success in keeping America safe and prosperous. We extend our best wishes, and we also want them to have luck — a very important word.I’d like to begin by thanking just a few of the amazing people who made our remarkable journey possible.First, let me express my overwhelming gratitude for the love and support of our spectacular First Lady, Melania. Let me also share my deepest appreciation to my daughter Ivanka, my son-in-law Jared, and to Barron, Don, Eric, Tiffany, and Lara. You fill my world with light and with joy.I also want to thank Vice President Mike Pence, his wonderful wife Karen, and the entire Pence family.Thank you as well to my Chief of Staff, Mark Meadows; the dedicated members of the White House Staff and the Cabinet; and all the incredible people across our administration who poured out their heart and soul to fight for America.I also want to take a moment to thank a truly exceptional group of people: the United States Secret Service. My family and I will forever be in your debt. My profound gratitude as well to everyone in the White House Military Office, the teams of Marine One and Air Force One, every member of the Armed Forces, and state and local law enforcement all across our country.Most of all, I want to thank the American people. To serve as your President has been an honor beyond description. Thank you for this extraordinary privilege. And that’s what it is — a great privilege and a great honor.We must never forget that while Americans will always have our disagreements, we are a nation of incredible, decent, faithful, and peace-loving citizens who all want our country to thrive and flourish and be very, very successful and good. We are a truly magnificent nation.All Americans were horrified by the assault on our Capitol. Political violence is an attack on everything we cherish as Americans. It can never be tolerated.Now more than ever, we must unify around our shared values and rise above the partisan rancor, and forge our common destiny.Four years ago, I came to Washington as the only true outsider ever to win the presidency. I had not spent my career as a politician, but as a builder looking at open skylines and imagining infinite possibilities. I ran for President because I knew there were towering new summits for America just waiting to be scaled. I knew the potential for our nation was boundless as long as we put America first.So I left behind my former life and stepped into a very difficult arena, but an arena nevertheless, with all sorts of potential if properly done. America had given me so much, and I wanted to give something back.Together with millions of hardworking patriots across this land, we built the greatest political movement in the history of our country. We also built the greatest economy in the history of the world. It was about “America First” because we all wanted to make America great again. We restored the principle that a nation exists to serve its citizens. Our agenda was not about right or left, it wasn’t about Republican or Democrat, but about the good of a nation, and that means the whole nation.With the support and prayers of the American people, we achieved more than anyone thought possible. Nobody thought we could even come close.We passed the largest package of tax cuts and reforms in American history. We slashed more job-killing regulations than any administration had ever done before. We fixed our broken trade deals, withdrew from the horrible Trans-Pacific Partnership and the impossible Paris Climate Accord, renegotiated the one-sided South Korea deal, and we replaced NAFTA with the groundbreaking USMCA — that’s Mexico and Canada — a deal that’s worked out very, very well.Also, and very importantly, we imposed historic and monumental tariffs on China; made a great new deal with China. But before the ink was even dry, we and the whole world got hit with the China virus. Our trade relationship was rapidly changing, billions and billions of dollars were pouring into the U.S., but the virus forced us to go in a different direction.The whole world suffered, but America outperformed other countries economically because of our incredible economy and the economy that we built. Without the foundations and footings, it wouldn’t have worked out this way. We wouldn’t have some of the best numbers we’ve ever had.We also unlocked our energy resources and became the world’s number-one producer of oil and natural gas by far. Powered by these policies, we built the greatest economy in the history of the world. We reignited America’s job creation and achieved record-low unemployment for African Americans, Hispanic Americans, Asian Americans, women — almost everyone.Incomes soared, wages boomed, the American Dream was restored, and millions were lifted from poverty in just a few short years. It was a miracle. The stock market set one record after another, with 148 stock market highs during this short period of time, and boosted the retirements and pensions of hardworking citizens all across our nation. 401(k)s are at a level they’ve never been at before. We’ve never seen numbers like we’ve seen, and that’s before the pandemic and after the pandemic.We rebuilt the American manufacturing base, opened up thousands of new factories, and brought back the beautiful phrase: “Made in the USA.”To make life better for working families, we doubled the child tax credit and signed the largest-ever expansion of funding for childcare and development. We joined with the private sector to secure commitments to train more than 16 million American workers for the jobs of tomorrow.When our nation was hit with the terrible pandemic, we produced not one, but two vaccines with record-breaking speed, and more will quickly follow. They said it couldn’t be done but we did it. They call it a “medical miracle,” and that’s what they’re calling it right now: a “medical miracle.”Another administration would have taken 3, 4, 5, maybe even up to 10 years to develop a vaccine. We did in nine months.We grieve for every life lost, and we pledge in their memory to wipe out this horrible pandemic once and for all.When the virus took its brutal toll on the world’s economy, we launched the fastest economic recovery our country has ever seen. We passed nearly $4 trillion in economic relief, saved or supported over 50 million jobs, and slashed the unemployment rate in half. These are numbers that our country has never seen before.We created choice and transparency in healthcare, stood up to big pharma in so many ways, but especially in our effort to get favored-nations clauses added, which will give us the lowest prescription drug prices anywhere in the world.We passed VA Choice, VA Accountability, Right to Try, and landmark criminal justice reform.We confirmed three new justices of the United States Supreme Court. We appointed nearly 300 federal judges to interpret our Constitution as written.For years, the American people pleaded with Washington to finally secure the nation’s borders. I am pleased to say we answered that plea and achieved the most secure border in U.S. history. We have given our brave border agents and heroic ICE officers the tools they need to do their jobs better than they have ever done before, and to enforce our laws and keep America safe.We proudly leave the next administration with the strongest and most robust border security measures ever put into place. This includes historic agreements with Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador, along with more than 450 miles of powerful new wall.We restored American strength at home and American leadership abroad. The world respects us again. Please don’t lose that respect.We reclaimed our sovereignty by standing up for America at the United Nations and withdrawing from the one-sided global deals that never served our interests. And NATO countries are now paying hundreds of billions of dollars more than when I arrived just a few years ago. It was very unfair. We were paying the cost for the world. Now the world is helping us.And perhaps most importantly of all, with nearly $3 trillion, we fully rebuilt the American military — all made in the USA. We launched the first new branch of the United States Armed Forces in 75 years: the Space Force. And last spring, I stood at Kennedy Space Center in Florida and watched as American astronauts returned to space on American rockets for the first time in many, many years.We revitalized our alliances and rallied the nations of the world to stand up to China like never before.We obliterated the ISIS caliphate and ended the wretched life of its founder and leader, al Baghdadi. We stood up to the oppressive Iranian regime and killed the world’s top terrorist, Iranian butcher Qasem Soleimani.We recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel and recognized Israeli sovereignty over the Golan Heights.As a result of our bold diplomacy and principled realism, we achieved a series of historic peace deals in the Middle East. Nobody believed it could happen. The Abraham Accords opened the doors to a future of peace and harmony, not violence and bloodshed. It is the dawn of a new Middle East, and we are bringing our soldiers home.I am especially proud to be the first President in decades who has started no new wars.Above all, we have reasserted the sacred idea that, in America, the government answers to the people. Our guiding light, our North Star, our unwavering conviction has been that we are here to serve the noble everyday citizens of America. Our allegiance is not to the special interests, corporations, or global entities; it’s to our children, our citizens, and to our nation itself.As President, my top priority, my constant concern, has always been the best interests of American workers and American families. I did not seek the easiest course; by far, it was actually the most difficult. I did not seek the path that would get the least criticism. I took on the tough battles, the hardest fights, the most difficult choices because that’s what you elected me to do. Your needs were my first and last unyielding focus.This, I hope, will be our greatest legacy: Together, we put the American people back in charge of our country. We restored self-government. We restored the idea that in America no one is forgotten, because everyone matters and everyone has a voice. We fought for the principle that every citizen is entitled to equal dignity, equal treatment, and equal rights because we are all made equal by God. Everyone is entitled to be treated with respect, to have their voice heard, and to have their government listen. You are loyal to your country, and my administration was always loyal to you.We worked to build a country in which every citizen could find a great job and support their wonderful families. We fought for the communities where every American could be safe and schools where every child could learn. We promoted a culture where our laws would be upheld, our heroes honored, our history preserved, and law-abiding citizens are never taken for granted. Americans should take tremendous satisfaction in all that we have achieved together. It’s incredible.Now, as I leave the White House, I have been reflecting on the dangers that threaten the priceless inheritance we all share. As the world’s most powerful nation, America faces constant threats and challenges from abroad. But the greatest danger we face is a loss of confidence in ourselves, a loss of confidence in our national greatness. A nation is only as strong as its spirit. We are only as dynamic as our pride. We are only as vibrant as the faith that beats in the hearts of our people.No nation can long thrive that loses faith in its own values, history, and heroes, for these are the very sources of our unity and our vitality.What has always allowed America to prevail and triumph over the great challenges of the past has been an unyielding and unashamed conviction in the nobility of our country and its unique purpose in history. We must never lose this conviction. We must never forsake our belief in America.The key to national greatness lies in sustaining and instilling our shared national identity. That means focusing on what we have in common: the heritage that we all share.At the center of this heritage is also a robust belief in free expression, free speech, and open debate. Only if we forget who we are, and how we got here, could we ever allow political censorship and blacklisting to take place in America. It’s not even thinkable. Shutting down free and open debate violates our core values and most enduring traditions.In America, we don’t insist on absolute conformity or enforce rigid orthodoxies and punitive speech codes. We just don’t do that. America is not a timid nation of tame souls who need to be sheltered and protected from those with whom we disagree. That’s not who we are. It will never be who we are.For nearly 250 years, in the face of every challenge, Americans have always summoned our unmatched courage, confidence, and fierce independence. These are the miraculous traits that once led millions of everyday citizens to set out across a wild continent and carve out a new life in the great West. It was the same profound love of our God-given freedom that willed our soldiers into battle and our astronauts into space.As I think back on the past four years, one image rises in my mind above all others. Whenever I traveled all along the motorcade route, there were thousands and thousands of people. They came out with their families so that they could stand as we passed, and proudly wave our great American flag. It never failed to deeply move me. I knew that they did not just come out to show their support of me; they came out to show me their support and love for our country.This is a republic of proud citizens who are united by our common conviction that America is the greatest nation in all of history. We are, and must always be, a land of hope, of light, and of glory to all the world. This is the precious inheritance that we must safeguard at every single turn.For the past four years, I have worked to do just that. From a great hall of Muslim leaders in Riyadh to a great square of Polish people in Warsaw; from the floor of the Korean Assembly to the podium at the United Nations General Assembly; and from the Forbidden City in Beijing to the shadow of Mount Rushmore, I fought for you, I fought for your family, I fought for our country. Above all, I fought for America and all it stands for — and that is safe, strong, proud, and free.Now, as I prepare to hand power over to a new administration at noon on Wednesday, I want you to know that the movement we started is only just beginning. There’s never been anything like it. The belief that a nation must serve its citizens will not dwindle but instead only grow stronger by the day.As long as the American people hold in their hearts deep and devoted love of country, then there is nothing that this nation cannot achieve. Our communities will flourish. Our people will be prosperous. Our traditions will be cherished. Our faith will be strong. And our future will be brighter than ever before.I go from this majestic place with a loyal and joyful heart, an optimistic spirit, and a supreme confidence that for our country and for our children, the best is yet to come.Thank you, and farewell. God bless you. God bless the United States of America. My fellow Americans,I want to speak to you tonight about the troubling events of the past week. As I have said, the incursion of the US capitol struck at the very heart of our republic. It angered and appalled millions of Americans across the political spectrum.I want to be very clear. I unequivocally condemn the violence that we saw last week. Violence and vandalism have absolutely no place in our country and no place in our movement. Making America Great Again has always been about defending the rule of law, supporting the men and women of law enforcement, and upholding our nation's most sacred traditions and values.Mob violence goes against everything I believe in, and everything our movement stands for. No true supporter of mine could ever endorse political violence. No true supporter of mine could ever disrespect law enforcement or our great American flag. No true supporter of mine could ever threaten or harass their fellow Americans. If you do any of these things, you are not supporting our movement. You are attacking it, and you are attacking our country. We cannot tolerate it.Tragically, over the course of the past year, made so difficult because of covid-19, we have seen political violence spiral out of control. We have seen too many riots, too many mobs, too many acts of intimidation and destruction. It must stop, whether you are on the right or on the left, a democrat or a republican, there is never a justification for violence. No excuses. No exceptions.America is a nation of laws. Those who engaged in the attacks last week will be brought to justice.Now I am asking everyone who has ever believed in our agenda, to be thinking of ways to ease tensions, calm tempers, and help to promote peace in our country. There has been reporting that additional demonstrations are being planned in the coming days, both here in Washington and across the country. I have been briefed by the US secret service on the potential threats.Every American deserves to have their voice heard in a respectful and peaceful way. That is your First Amendment right. But I cannot emphasize that there must be no violence, no lawbreaking, and no vandalism of any kind. Everyone must follow our laws and obey the instructions of law enforcement.I have directed federal agencies to use all necessary resources to maintain order. In Washington, DC, we are bringing in thousands of national guard members to secure the city and ensure that a transition can occur safely and without incident.Like all of you, I was shocked and deeply saddened by the calamity at the capitol last week. I want to thank the hundreds of millions of incredible American citizens who have responded to this moment with calm, moderation, and grace. We will get through this challenge, just like we always do.I also want to say a few words about the unprecedented assault on free speech we have seen in recent days. These are tense and difficult times. The efforts to censor, cancel, and blacklist our fellow citizens are wrong, and they are dangerous. What is needed now is for us to listen to one another, not to silence to one another. All of us can choose by our actions to rise above the rancor and find common ground and shared purpose. We must focus on advancing the interests of the whole nation, delivering the miracle vaccines, defeating the pandemic, rebuilding the economy, protecting our national security, and upholding the rule of law.Today, I am calling on all Americans to overcome the passions of the moment and join together as one American people. Let us choose to move forward united for the good of our families, our communities, and our country. Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America. I would like to begin by addressing the heinous attack on the United States Capitol. Like all Americans, I am outraged by the violence, lawlessness, and mayhem. I immediately deployed the National Guard and federal law enforcement to secure the building and expel the intruders.America is, and must always be, a nation of law and order. The demonstrators who infiltrated the Capitol have defiled the seat of American democracy.To those who engaged in the acts of violence and destruction, you do not represent our country.And to those who broke the law, you will pay.We have just been through an intense election, and emotions are high, but now tempers must be cooled, and calm restored. We must get on with the business of America.My campaign vigorously pursued every legal avenue to contest the election results. My only goal was to ensure the integrity of the vote. In so doing, I was fighting to defend American democracy. I continue to strongly believe that we must reform our election laws to verify the identity and the eligibility of all voters and to ensure faith and confidence in all future elections.Now Congress has certified the results. A new administration will be inaugurated on January 20. My focus now turns to ensuring a smooth, orderly, and seamless transition of power. This moment calls for healing and reconciliation.2020 has been a challenging time for our people. A menacing pandemic has upended the lives of our citizens, isolated millions in their homes, damaged our economy, and claimed countless lives. Defeating this pandemic and rebuilding the greatest economy on earth will require all of us working together. It will require a renewed emphasis on the civic values of patriotism, faith, charity, community, and family. We must revitalize the sacred bonds of love and loyalty that bind us together as one national family.To the citizens of our country, serving as your president has been the honor of my lifetime. And to all of my wonderful supporters, I know you are disappointed but I also want you to know that our incredible journey is only just beginning. Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America. I know your pain. I know your hurt.We had an election that was stolen from us. It was a landslide election, and everyone knows it, especially the other side.But you have to go home now. We have to have peace. We have to have law and order. We have to respect our great people in law and order.We don't want anybody hurt. It is a very tough period of time.There has never been a time like this where such a thing happened, where they could take it away from all of us, from me, from you, from our country.This was a fraudulent election, but we can't play into the hands of these people.We have to have peace. So go home. We love you. You are very special. You've see what happens. You see the way others are treated that are so bad and so evil. I know how you feel. But go home and go home.... (video cuts off early) THE PRESIDENT: Good evening. I’d like to provide the American people with an update on our efforts to protect the integrity of our very important 2020 election. If you count the legal votes, I easily win. If you count the illegal votes, they can try to steal the election from us. If you count the votes that came in late — we’re looking at them very strongly. But a lot of votes came in late.I’ve already decisively won many critical states, including massive victories in Florida, Iowa, Indiana, Ohio, to name just a few. We won these and many other victories despite historic election interference from big media, big money, and big tech.As everybody saw, we won by historic numbers. And the pollsters got it knowingly wrong. They got it knowingly wrong. We had polls that were so ridiculous, and everybody knew that at the time. There was no blue wave that they predicted. They thought there was going to be a big blue wave; that was false. That was done for suppression reasons. But instead, there was a big red wave.And it’s been properly acknowledged, actually, by the media. They were, I think, very impressed, but that was after the fact. That doesn’t do us any good.We kept the Senate, despite having twice as many seats to defend as Democrats. And in a really — much more competitive states, we’ve — we did a fantastic job with the Senate, and I think we’re very proud of what’s happened there. We had many more seats to defend.They spent almost $200 million on Senate races in South Carolina and Kentucky alone — two races — and hundreds of millions of dollars overall against us. At the national level, our opponents’ major donors were Wall Street bankers and special interests. Our major donors were police officers, farmers, everyday citizens. Yet for the first time ever, we lost zero races in the House. I was talking to Kevin McCarthy today. He said he couldn’t believe it: zero races. Very unusual thing. Zero. And actually won many new seats with, I think, many more on the way.This was also the year of the Republican woman. More Republican women were elected to Congress than ever before. That’s a great achievement. I won the largest share of non-white voters of any Republican in 60 years, including historic numbers of Latino, African American, Asian American, and Native American voters — the largest ever in our history. We grew our party by 4 million voters, the greatest turnout in Republican Party history.Democrats are the party of the big donors, the big media, the big tech, it seems. And Republicans have become the party of the American worker, and that’s what’s happened. And we’re also, I believe, the party of inclusion.As everyone now recognizes, media polling was election interference, in the truest sense of that word, by powerful special interests. These really phony polls — I have to call them phony polls, fake polls — were designed to keep our voters at home, create the illusion of momentum for Mr. Biden, and diminish Republicans’ ability to raise funds. They were what’s called “suppression polls.” Everyone knows that now. And it’s never been used to the extent that it’s been used on this last election.To highlight just a few examples: The day before election, Quinnipiac — which was wrong on every occasion that I know of — had Joe Biden up by 5 points in Florida, and they were off by 8.4 points. And I won Florida easily. Easily. So, they had me losing Florida by a lot, and I ended up winning Florida by a lot. Other than that, they were very accurate. They had him up 4 points in Ohio, and they were off by 12.2 points. And I also won Ohio — the great state of Ohio — very easily.The Washington Post had Biden up 17 points in Wisconsin, and it was basically even. They were off by about 17 points, and they knew that. They’re not stupid people. They knew that. Suppression.There are now only a few states yet to be decided in the presidential race. The voting apparatus of those states are run, in all cases, by Democrats.We were winning in all the key locations by a lot, actually. And then our number started miraculously getting whittled away in secret, and they wouldn’t allow legally permissible observers. We went to court, in a couple of instances, and we were able to get the observers put in. And when the observers got there, they wanted them 60, 70 feet away, 80 feet, 100 feet away — or outside the building to observe people inside the building.And we won a case — a big case. And we have others happening. There are a lot of — lots of litigation. Even beyond our litigation, there’s tremendous amount of litigation generally because of how unfair this process was, and I predicted that. I’ve been talking about mail-in voting for a long time. It’s — it’s really destroyed our system.It’s a corrupt system. And it makes people corrupt even if they aren’t by nature, but they become corrupt; it’s too easy. They want to find out how many votes they need, and then they seem to be able to find them. They wait and wait, and then they find them.And you see that on Election Night. We were ahead in votes in North Carolina by a lot — tremendous number of votes. And we’re still ahead by a lot, but not as many because they’re finding ballots all of a sudden. “Oh, we have some mail-in ballots.”It’s amazing how those mail-in ballots are so one-sided, too. I know that it’s supposed to be to the advantage of the Democrats, but in all cases, they’re so one-sided.We were up by nearly 700,000 votes in Pennsylvania. I won Pennsylvania by a lot, and that gets whittled down to — I think they said now we’re up by 90,000 votes. And they’ll keep coming and coming and coming. They find them all over. And they don’t want us to have any observers, although we won a court case. The judge said you have to have observers.Likewise, in Geor- — and they’re appealing. Actually, they’re appealing. We won a case that we want people to watch and we want observers, and they’re actually appealing, which is sort of interesting. I wonder why they’d appeal — that all we want to do is have people watch as they do the vote tabulations.Likewise, in Georgia, I won by a lot — a lot — with a lead of over — getting close to 300,000 votes on Election Night in Georgia. And, by the way, got whittled down, and now it’s getting to be to a point where I’ll go from winning by a lot to perhaps being even down a little bit.In Georgia, a pipe burst in a faraway location, totally unrelated to the location of what was happening, and they stopped counting for four hours, and a lot of things happened. The election apparatus in Georgia is run by Democrats.We also had margins of 300,000 in Michigan. We were way up in Michigan; won the state. And in Wisconsin, we did likewise fantastically well. And that got whittled down. Every — in every case, they got whittled down.Today, we’re on track to win Arizona. We only need to carry, I guess, 55 percent of the remaining vote — 55 percent margins. And that’s a margin that we’ve significantly exceeded. So we’ll see what happens with that, but we’re on track to do okay in Arizona.Our goal is to defend the integrity of the election. We’ll not allow the corruption to steal such an important election or any election, for that matter. And we can’t allow silence –anybody to silence our voters and manufacture results.I’ve never had — I’ve been doing a lot of public things for a long time; I’ve never had anything that’s been as inspirational by people — calling, talking, sending things to us. I’ve never seen such — such love and such affection and such spirit as I’ve seen for this. People know what’s happening, and they see what’s happening, and it’s before their eyes.And there are many instances which will be reported very shortly. There’s tremendous litigation going on. And this is a case where they’re trying to steal an election, they’re trying to rig an election, and we can’t let that happen. Detroit and Philadelphia — known as two of the most corrupt political places anywhere in our country, easily — cannot be responsible for engineering the outcome of a presidential race — a very important presidential race.In Pennsylvania, Democrats have gone to the State Supreme Court to try and ban our election observers, and very strongly. Now, we won the case, but they’re — they’re going forward. They don’t want anybody in there. They don’t want anybody watching them as they count the ballots, and I can’t imagine why. There’s absolutely no legitimate reason why they would not want to have people watching this process, because if it’s straight, they would be — they should be proud of it. Instead, they’re trying, obviously, to commit fraud. There’s no question about that.In Philadelphia, observers have been kept far away — very far away — so far that people are using binoculars to try and see, and there’s been tremendous problems caused. They put paper on all of the windows so you can’t see in, and the people that are banned are very unhappy and become somewhat violent.The 11th Circuit ruled that, in Georgia, the votes have been in by Election Day — that they should be in by Election Day, and they weren’t. Votes are coming in after Election Day. And they had a ruling already that you have to have the votes in by Election Day. To the best of my knowledge, votes should be in by Election Day, and they didn’t do that.Democrat officials never believed they could win this election honestly. I really believe that. That’s why they did the mail-in ballots, where there’s tremendous corruption and fraud going on. That’s why they mailed out tens of millions of unsolicited ballots without any verification measures whatsoever. And I’ve told everybody that these things would happen, because I’ve seen it happen. I watched a lot of different elections before they decided to go with this big, massive election with tens of millions of ballots going out to everybody — in many cases, totally unsolicited.This was unprecedented in American history. This was by design. Despite years of claiming to care about the election security, they refuse to include any requirement to verify signatures, identities, or even determine whether they’re eligible or ineligible to vote. People are walking in that they have no idea; they’re just taking numbers. They’re writing down things — the workers — and doing a lot of bad things. And we have a lot of information coming and litigation that you’ll see that will shake even you people up, and you’ve seen it all.The officials overseeing the counting in Pennsylvania and other key states are all part of a corrupt Democrat machine that you’ve written about — and, for a long time, you’ve been writing about the corrupt Democrat machine. I went to school there, and I know a lot about it. It hasn’t changed. It’s a long time ago, and it hasn’t changed. It’s gotten worse.In Pennsylvania, partisan Democrats have allowed ballots in the state to be received three days after the election, and we think much more than that. And they are counting those without even postmarks or any identification whatsoever. So you don’t have postmarks; you don’t have identification. There have been a number of disturbing irregularities across the nation. Our campaign has been denied access to observe any counting in Detroit. Detroit is another place.So you don’t have postmarks; you don’t have identification. There have been a number of disturbing irregularities across the nation. Our campaign has been denied access to observe any counting in Detroit. Detroit is another place — and I wouldn’t say has the best reputation for election integrity.Poll workers in Michigan were duplicating ballots. But when our observers attempted to challenge the activity, those poll workers jumped in front of the volunteers to block their view so that they couldn’t see what they were doing, and it became a little bit dangerous.One major hub for counting ballots in Detroit covered up the windows, again, with large pieces of cardboard. And so they wanted to protect and block the counting area. They didn’t want anybody seeing the counting, even though these were observers who are legal observers that were supposed to be there.In Detroit, there were hours of unexplained delay in delivering many of the votes for counting. The final batch did not arrive until four in the morning and — even though the polls closed at eight o’clock. So they brought it in, and the batches came in, and nobody knew where they came from. We’ve also been denied access to observe in critical places in Georgia.In multiple swing states, counting was halted for hours and hours on Election Night, with results withheld from major Democrat-run locations, only to appear later. And they certainly appeared, and they all had the name “Biden” on them, or just about all — I think almost all. They all had the name “Biden” on them, which is a little strange.I challenge Joe and every Democrat to clarify that they only want legal votes. Because they talk about votes, and I think they should use the word “legal” — “legal votes.” “We want every legal vote counted.” And I want every legal vote counted. We want openness and transparency — no secret count rooms, no mystery ballots, no illegal votes being cast after Election Day.You have Election Day, and the laws are very strong on that. You have an Election Day. And they don’t want votes cast after Election Day, and they want the process to be an honest one. It’s so important. We want an honest election, and we want an honest count, and we want honest people working back there because it’s a very important job.So that’s the way this country is going to win. That’s the way the United States will win. And we think we will win the election very easily. We think there’s going to be a lot of litigation because we have so much evidence, so much proof. And it’s going to end up, perhaps, at the highest court in the land. We’ll see. But we think there’ll be a lot of litigation because we can’t have an election stolen by — like this.And I — I tell you, I would — I have been talking about this for many months with all of you. And I’ve said very strongly that mail-in ballots are going to end up being a disaster. Small elections were a disaster. Small, very easy-to-handle elections were disastrous.This is a large-scale version, and it’s getting worse and worse every day. We’re hearing stories that are horror stories — absolute horror stories. And we can’t let that happen to the United States of America. It’s not a question of who wins — Republican, Democrat; Joe, myself. We can’t let that happen to our country. We can’t be disgraced by having something like this happen.So it will be hopefully cleared up, maybe soon; I hope soon. But it’ll probably go through a process — a legal process. And, as you know, I’ve claimed certain states and he’s claiming states. So we can both claim the states, but ultimately I have a feeling judges are going to have to rule. But there’s been a lot of shenanigans, and we can’t stand for that in our country.Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Appreciate it. Thank you very much. Distinguished guests and my fellow citizens, this is a momentous day for America, for the United States Constitution, and for the fair and impartial rule of law.The Constitution is the ultimate defense of American liberty. The faithful application of the law is the cornerstone of our Republic. That is why, as President, I have no more solemn obligation and no greater honor than to appoint Supreme Court justices.On this October evening — and it is so beautiful — the First Lady and I welcome you to the White House to bear witness to history. In a few moments, we will proudly swear in the newest member of the United States Supreme Court: Justice Amy Coney Barrett.She is one of our nation’s most brilliant legal scholars, and she will make an outstanding justice on the highest court in our land.Justice Barrett’s oath will be administered by the Court’s longest-serving member currently on the bench — a man whose allegiance to the law has earned him the respect and gratitude of all Americans: Justice Clarence Thomas.Our country owes a debt of thanks to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. We appreciate it very much, Mitch.Thank you. And we are grateful as well to the Senate Judiciary Chairman Lindsey Graham. Thank you, Lindsey.Also with us, Senators Marsha Blackburn, Mike Braun, Bill Cassidy, Kevin Cramer, Ted Cruz, Steve Daines, Ron Johnson, James Lankford, Mike Lee, and Martha McSally. And I hope I didn’t leave anybody out.And a very special thanks to our great Vice President, Mike Pence.Thank you, Mike.Also, I want to thank White House Counsel Pat Cipollone. Thank you, Pat.And very importantly, I want to welcome Justice Barrett’s husband, Jesse.Thank you, Jesse. Thank you.Let me also recognize your seven children — your great, beautiful children — who have become, really, just very, very popular in this nation.People have been watching them and loving them, and they’re watching right now back home in Indiana. Thank you very much.And I speak to everyone when I say that the Barrett family has captured America’s heart.It is highly fitting that Justice Barrett fills the seat of a true pioneer for women: Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg. Tonight, Justice Barrett becomes not only the fifth woman to serve on our nation’s highest court, but the very first mother of school-aged children to become a Supreme Court justice. Very important.Over the past few weeks, the entire world has seen Justice Barrett’s deep knowledge, tremendous poise, and towering intellect. She answered questions for hours on end.Throughout her entire confirmation, her impeccable credentials were unquestioned, unchallenged, and obvious to all.Justice Barrett earned a full academic scholarship to Notre Dame Law School, graduated first in her class, and served as a clerk for Justice Antonin Scalia. She was a beloved professor at Notre Dame Law School for 15 years before I very proudly appointed her to the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the 7th Circuit in 2017.The American people have been profoundly impressed to learn of her achievements, her compassion, her generosity, her faith, and her sterling character.Justice Barrett has made clear she will issue rulings based solely upon a faithful reading of the law and the Constitution as written, not legislate from the bench.The equal, impartial, and constitutional rule of law that we enjoy every day in America is one of the crowning achievements in the history of human civilization. It is the triumph of reason, experience, and the values which are eternal and everlasting. Our devotion to this inheritance is what has made America the most just, exceptional, and glorious nation ever to exist.I want every American child watching to understand that this is a very special and important ceremony. We are fulfilling the duty that passes to each new generation to sustain the national traditions and virtues that make possible everything we have achieved before that we will do tomorrow.Because of our Constitution and our culture of freedom, you live in a land where anything is possible and where any dream can come true. No matter who you are, no matter your background, in America, everyone is entitled to equal protection under our laws, and your sacred rights can never, ever be taken away.The march of liberty that began with the American Revolution continues onward this evening.Tonight at the White House, we carry forward the cause of freedom, equality, and justice for which so many generations of Americans have given so much. We honor the cause for which men died to win the Civil War, and for which they jumped out of airplanes and shed their blood on distant battlefields. We honor the immortal principles that inspired millions in the struggle for Civil Rights, and we take special pride in the nation that inspires billions of people all over the world.We must never take this radiant inheritance for granted. We must never lose confidence in our history, our heritage, or in our heroes.To reach for the stars, we must stand upon the strong and sturdy foundation built by those incredible Americans who came before.Justice Barrett, as you take your oath tonight, the legacy of our ancestors falls to you.The American people put their trust in you and their faith in you as you take up the task of defending our laws, our Constitution, and this country that we all love. We ask God to give you wisdom and courage. I know you will make us all very, very proud.As long as we are loyal to our founding and to our fellow citizens, America’s future will be bright, America’s destiny will be great, and America’s people will forever and always be free. I now ask Justice Thomas to administer the Oath.Thank you very much.(The Judicial Oath is administered.)JUSTICE BARRETT: Thank you.Thank you so very much. Thank you all for being here tonight. And thank you, President Trump, for selecting me to serve as an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court. It’s a privilege to be asked to serve my country in this office, and I stand here tonight truly honored and humbled.Thanks also to the Senate for giving its consent to my appointment. I am grateful for the confidence you have expressed in me, and I pledge to you and to the American people that I will discharge my duties to the very best of my ability.This was a rigorous confirmation process, and I thank all of you, especially Leader McConnell and Chairman Graham for helping me to navigate it.My heartfelt thanks go to the members of the White House staff and Department of Justice who worked tirelessly to support me through this process. Your stamina is remarkable, and I have been the beneficiary of it.Jesse and I are also so grateful to the many people have supported — who have supported our family over these last several weeks.Through ways both tangible and intangible, you have made this day possible. Jesse and I have been truly awestruck by your generosity.I have spent a good amount of time over the last month at the Senate, both in meetings with individual senators and in days of hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee. The confirmation process has made ever clearer to me one of the fundamental differences between the federal judiciary and the United States Senate, and perhaps the most acute is the role of policy preferences.It is the job of a senator to pursue her policy preferences. In fact, it would be a dereliction of duty for her to put policy goals aside. By contrast, it is the job of a judge to resist her policy preferences. It would be a dereliction of duty for her to give in to them.Federal judges don’t stand for election.Thus, they have no basis for claiming that their preferences reflect those of the people.This separation of duty from political preference is what makes the judiciary distinct among the three branches of government.A judge declares independence not only from Congress and the President, but also from the private beliefs that might otherwise move her.The Judicial Oath captures the essence of the judicial duty the rule of law must always control.My fellow Americans, even though we judges don’t face elections, we still work for you. It is your Constitution that establishes the rule of law and the judicial independence that is so central to it.The oath that I have solemnly taken tonight means, at its core, that I will do my job without any fear or favor, and that I will do so independently of both the political branches and of my own preferences.I love the Constitution and the Democratic Republic that it establishes, and I will devote myself to preserving it.Thank you. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. I stand before you today to fulfill one of my highest and most important duties under the United States Constitution: the nomination of a Supreme Court Justice. This is my third such nomination after Justice Gorsuch and Justice Kavanaugh. And it is a very proud moment indeed.Over the past week, our nation has mourned the loss of a true American legend. Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg was a legal giant and a pioneer for women. Her extraordinary life and legacy will inspire Americans for generations to come.Now we gather in the Rose Garden to continue our never-ending task of ensuring equal justice and preserving the impartial rule of law.Today, it is my honor to nominate one of our nation’s most brilliant and gifted legal minds to the Supreme Court. She is a woman of unparalleled achievement, towering intellect, sterling credentials, and unyielding loyalty to the Constitution: Judge Amy Coney Barrett.We’re also joined by Amy’s husband, Jesse—thank you, Jesse, very much—and their seven beautiful children. Congratulations to you all. A very special day.With us as well are the First Lady—thank you, First Lady, along with Vice President Mike Pence and his amazing wife, Karen. Thank you very much, Mike.Judge Barrett is a graduate of Rhodes College and the University of Notre Dame Law School. At Notre Dame, she earned a full academic scholarship, served as the Executive Editor of the Law Review, graduated first in her class, and received the law school’s award for the best record of scholarship and achievement.Upon graduation, she became a clerk for Judge Laurence Silberman on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia. Amy then received one of the highest honors a young lawyer could have, serving as a clerk on the Supreme Court for Justice Antonin Scalia. A highly, a very highly respected law professor at Notre Dame wrote to Justice Scalia with a one-sentence recommendation: “Amy Coney is the best student I ever had.” That’s pretty good. Justice Scalia hired her shortly thereafter.And we are honored to have his wonderful wife, Maureen—where is Maureen? Maureen Scalia—with us today.  Thank you. And our great Secretary of Labor, thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. Secretary. Very good genes in that family, I will say. Very good genes.Before joining the bench, Judge Barrett spent 15 years as a Professor at the University of Notre Dame Law School. She was renowned for her scholarship, celebrated by her colleagues, and beloved by her students. Three times, she was selected at Notre Dame, Distinguished Professor of the Year.When I nominated Judge Barrett to serve on the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit in 2017, every law clerk from her time at the Supreme Court endorsed her and endorsed her nomination, writing, quote, “We are Democrats, Republicans, and independents…yet we write to support the nomination of Professor Barrett to be a Circuit Judge…Professor Barrett is a woman of remarkable intellect and character. She is eminently qualified for the job.”And I can tell you, I did that too. I looked and I studied, and you are very eminently qualified for this job. You are going to be fantastic. Thank you. Really fantastic.The entire Notre Dame Law facility and faculty, everybody—everybody at that school also—we got so many letters—also wrote letters of support of Amy’s nomination to the Seventh Circuit. They wrote, in effect: “Despite our differences, we unanimously agree that our constitutional system depends upon an independent judiciary staffed by talented people devoted to the fair and impartial administration of the rule of law. And we unanimously agree that Amy is such a person.”For the last three years, Judge Barrett has served with immense distinction on the federal bench. Amy is more than a stellar scholar and judge; she is also a profoundly devoted mother. Her family is a core part of who Amy is. She opened her home and her heart, and adopted two beautiful children from Haiti. Her incredible bond with her youngest child, a son with Down Syndrome, is a true inspiration.If confirmed, Justice Barrett will make history as the first mother of school-aged children ever to serve on the U.S. Supreme Court. That’s good.To her children Emma, Vivian, Tess, John Peter, Liam, Juliet, and Benjamin, thank you for sharing your incredible mom with our country. Thank you very much.Amy Coney Barrett will decide cases based on the text of the Constitution as written. As Amy has said, “Being a judge takes courage. You are not there to decide cases as you may prefer. You are there to do your duty and to follow the law wherever it may take you.” That is exactly what Judge Barrett will do on the U.S. Supreme Court.I want to thank the members of the Senate. We have so many of them here today. Thank you very much. I see you in the audience, and you’re so proud. But I want to thank you for your commitment and to providing a fair and timely hearing. I know it will be that.Judge Barrett was confirmed to the Circuit Court three years ago by a bipartisan vote. Her qualifications are unsurpassed—unsurpassed—and her record is beyond reproach. This should be a straightforward and prompt confirmation. It should be very easy. Good luck. It’s going to be very quick. I’m sure it’ll be extremely non-controversial. We said that the last time, didn’t we? Well, thank you all very much, and thank you for being here. That’s really great. Thank you.I further urge all members of the other side of the aisle to provide Judge Barrett with the respectful and dignified hearing that she deserves and, frankly, that our country deserves. I urge lawmakers and members of the media to refrain from personal or partisan attacks.And the stakes for our country are incredibly high. Rulings that the Supreme Court will issue in the coming years will decide the survival of our Second Amendment, our religious liberty, our public safety, and so much more.To maintain security, liberty, and prosperity, we must preserve our priceless heritage of a nation of laws, and there is no one better to do that than Amy Coney Barrett.Law and order is the foundation of the American system of justice. No matter the issue, no matter the case before her, I am supremely confident that Judge Barrett will issue rulings based solely upon a fair reading of the law. She will defend the sacred principle of equal justice for citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed.Congratulations again to Judge Barrett. I know that you will make our country very, very proud.Please, Amy, say a few words. Thank you very much. Congratulations. Congratulations.JUDGE BARRETT: Thank you very much, Mr. President. I am deeply honored by the confidence that you have placed in me. And I am so grateful to you and the First Lady, to the Vice President and the Second Lady, and to so many others here for your kindness on this rather overwhelming occasion.I fully understand that this is a momentous decision for a President. And if the Senate does me the honor of confirming me, I pledge to discharge the responsibilities of this job to the very best of my ability. I love the United States, and I love the United States Constitution. I am truly, I am truly humbled by the prospect of serving on the Supreme Court.Should I be confirmed, I will be mindful of who came before me. The flag of the United States is still flying at half-staff in memory of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg to mark the end of a great American life. Justice Ginsburg began her career at a time when women were not welcome in the legal profession. But she not only broke glass ceilings, she smashed them. For that, she has won the admiration of women across the country and, indeed, all over the world.She was a woman of enormous talent and consequence, and her life of public service serves as an example to us all. Particularly poignant to me was her long and deep friendship with Justice Antonin Scalia, my own mentor.Justices Scalia and Ginsburg disagreed fiercely in print without rancor in person. Their ability to maintain a warm and rich friendship, despite their differences, even inspired an opera. These two great Americans demonstrated that arguments, even about matters of great consequence, need not destroy affection. In both my personal and professional relationships, I strive to meet that standard.I was lucky enough to clerk for Justice Scalia, and given his incalculable influence on my life, I am very moved to have members of the Scalia family here today, including his dear wife, Maureen.I clerked for Justice Scalia more than 20 years ago, but the lessons I learned still resonate. His judicial philosophy is mine too: A judge must apply the law as written. Judges are not policymakers, and they must be resolute in setting aside any policy views they might hold. The President has asked me to become the ninth justice, and as it happens, I’m used to being in a group of nine: my family.Our family includes me, my husband Jesse, Emma, Vivian, Tess, John Peter, Liam, Juliet, and Benjamin. Vivian and John Peter, as the President said, were born in Haiti and they came to us, five years apart, when they were very young. And the most revealing fact about Benjamin, our youngest, is that his brothers and sisters unreservedly identify him as their favorite sibling.Our children obviously make our life very full. While I am a judge, I’m better known back home as a room parent, carpool driver, and birthday party planner. When schools went remote last spring, I tried on another hat. Jesse and I became co-principals of the Barrett e-learning academy. And, yes, the list of enrolled students was a very long one.Our children are my greatest joy, even though they deprive me of any reasonable amount of sleep. I couldn’t manage this very full life without the unwavering support of my husband, Jesse. At the start of our marriage, I imagined that we would run our household as partners. As it has turned out, Jesse does far more than his share of the work. To my chagrin, I learned at dinner recently that my children consider him to be the better cook.For 21 years, Jesse has asked me, every single morning, what he can do for me that day. And though I almost always say “nothing,” he still finds ways to take things off my plate. And that’s not because he has a lot of free time—he has a busy law practice—it’s because he is a superb and generous husband, and I am very fortunate.Jesse and I, Jesse and I have a life full of relationships, not only with our children, but with siblings, friends, and fearless babysitters, one of whom is with us today. I am particularly grateful to my parents, Mike and Linda Coney. I spent the bulk of—I have spent the bulk of my adulthood as a Midwesterner, but I grew up in their New Orleans home. And as my brother and sisters can also attest, Mom and Dad’s generosity extends not only to us, but to more people than any of us could count. They are an inspiration.It is important at a moment like this to acknowledge family and friends. But this evening, I also want to acknowledge you, my fellow Americans. The President has nominated me to serve on the United States Supreme Court, and that institution belongs to all of us.If confirmed, I would not assume that role for the sake of those in my own circle, and certainly not for my own sake. I would assume this role to serve you. I would discharge the judicial oath, which requires me to administer justice without respect to persons, do equal right to the poor and rich, and faithfully and impartially discharge my duties under the United States Constitution.I have no illusions that the road ahead of me will be easy, either for the short term or the long haul. I never imagined that I would find myself in this position. But now that I am, I assure you that I will meet the challenge with both humility and courage.Members of the United States Senate, I look forward to working with you during the confirmation process, and I will do my very best to demonstrate that I am worthy of your support. Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Come on up, family. Come on up, family. I want to acknowledge Attorney General Bill Barr. Bill, thank you very much for being here. Chief of Staff—thank you very much, Chief. You’re doing a great job. And all of the senators—please, we really appreciate it. And I know you’re going to have a busy couple of weeks, but I think it’s going to be easier than you might think.So, thank you very much for being here. Thank you all. Thank you all very much. Thank you. Congratulations, Amy. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Thank you. Happy Labor Day. That was, really, a very special time I had speaking to some of the labor union heads and other people. They’re very happy with the way things are going. As you probably see, the numbers are terrific.So we called some people, wished them a very happy Labor Day, and they told us how they’re doing, and we really celebrate the American worker. We are in the midst of the fastest economic recovery in U.S. history. So we have a lot to be thankful for, including this really beautiful day. It’s why I thought we’d do this outside as opposed to in your more normal place.The United States experienced the smallest contraction of any major Western nation. You probably know that. You look around and see how we’re doing compared to every other nation, and our rise is spectacular. And we’re rebounding much more quickly from the pandemic.The U.S. economy added 1.4 million jobs last month, and we’ve have added a record-setting 10.6 million jobs since May. 10.6 million jobs since May. That’s a record that is not even close. Second place is a long ways away.In July, the Congressional Budget Office was projecting unemployment over 10.5 percent through the end of 2020. So they thought 2020, and maybe it would be a lot longer than that. Some projections, where you’d go through the entire year, and that includes a lot of months in the following year, 2021. And instead, the unemployment rate plunged, really, to the surprise of many, all the way down to 8.4 percent in August. And that’s the second-largest single month decline on record. And we have the first; we have both of them. So we have the two number-one declines—“decline” meaning positive, not negative.We’re currently witnessing the fastest labor market recovery from an economic crisis in history—world history. By contrast, Biden presided over the worst, the weakest, and slowest economic recovery since the Great Depression. It was a long, slow slog, and it was a very small—very small on growth and very small on every other factor that you need. It was the weakest recovery.Under my leadership, next year will be the greatest economic year in the history of our country, I project. And some people are starting to agree. We have a “V” shape. It’s probably a “super V.” And you see what’s going on with the stock market, where it’s, in certain cases, already setting records. NASDAQ: has set 17 records already, and this is as we’re, hopefully, rounding the final turn in the pandemic.First, we’ll end the pandemic. Under Operation Warp Speed, we’ve pioneered groundbreaking therapies, reducing the fatality rate 85 percent since April. You don’t hear that from the press very often. They don’t like to talk about that. So the fatality rate, 85 percent—think of that—since April.The United States has experienced among the lowest case fatality rates of any major country in the world. And we are an absolute leader in every way. Under my leadership, we’ll produce a vaccine in record time. Biden and his very liberal running mate—the most liberal person in Congress, by the way, who’s not a competent person, in my opinion; would destroy this country and would destroy this economy—should immediately apologize for the reckless anti-vaccine rhetoric that they are talking right now, talking about endangering lives. And it undermines science.And what’s happening is, all of a sudden, you’ll have this incredible vaccine, and because of that fake rhetoric—it’s a politic rhetoric; that’s all it is. Just for politics. Because now they see we’ve done an incredible job, and in speed like nobody has ever seen before. This could’ve taken two or three years, and instead it’s going to be—it’s going to be done in a very short of period of time. Could even have it during the month of October.So, contrary to all of the lies, the vaccine that they’re—they politicalize. They’ll say anything. And it’s so dangerous for our country, what they say. But the vaccine will be very safe and very effective, and it will be delivered very soon. You could—you could have a very big surprise coming up. I’m sure you’ll be very happy. But the people will be happy. The people of the world will be happy.Next, we’ll return to unprecedented prosperity through our pro-American policies. We’ll pass new tax cuts to boost take-home pay. We’re going to be cutting taxes very substantially. We get it back through growth. We had tremendous growth until we got hit with the China virus.We’ll continue our historic regulatory reduction campaign. We’ve—as you know, in three and a half years, we’ve cut more regulations than any other administration, no matter how long, no matter what period of time you’re talking about. We’ll enact fair trade deals, and we’re working on seven major fair trade deals right now. And when I say “fair,” fair to our country—because our country was ripped off by every nation. Friend, foe, didn’t matter: Every nation was ripping us off at a level that it’s just unbelievable, to be honest.We’re going to be expanding Opportunity Zones, and we will keep that going. It’s been a tremendous—a tremendous program. I want to thank Senator Scott, South Carolina, for coming up with that whole concept, because he came up, and I liked it right away, and it was—it’s really turned out to be a tremendous thing, especially for African Americans, Hispanic Americans.We’ll continue to unleash American energy. We’re number one in the world. And we’re totally energy independent right now. And in 2021, we’ll create 10 million jobs, at least, in the first 10 months.Joe Biden and the radical, socialist Democrats would immediately collapse the economy. If they got in, they would collapse it. You’ll have a crash the likes of which you’ve never seen before. Your stocks, your 401(k)s—remember, it’s the people that own these massive, listed companies. A lot of people: rich people and not so rich people and middle-income people. And those stocks will crash like you’ve never seen before.The Biden plan begins with a 4-trillion-dollar tax hike. And that will end everything, including growth. There won’t be growth. There’ll be total contraction.Biden has also pledged to demolish the U.S. energy industry and implement the same policies causing blackouts in California. He wants to have things lit up with wind. He’ll have to talk to China, Russia, India, and lots of other countries, because they’re not doing that. And if they’re not doing it, it puts us at a tremendous economic disadvantage, and it doesn’t work.You take a look at the blackouts in California; it’s really rather amazing what’s going on there. They’ve tried to go, and that’s just with a small portion going that route. That doesn’t work, and it can’t fire up our big plants. We’re going to have this great industry that we’ve created. Can’t fire up our big plants.Biden’s plan for the China virus is to shut down the entire U.S. economy. He’s going to totally rely on somebody to walk up, “Yes, sir, it’s time to shut it down.” He’d be laying off tens of millions of workers and causing countless deaths from suicide, substance abuse, depression, heart disease, and other very serious illnesses.Because when you do a shutdown, there’s a problem on the other side; it’s not just from the virus. You have a big problem with suicides, with losing your jobs, with all sorts of things. You just take a look. Depression is a massive problem. And what happens is you—they turn to substance abuse, alcohol, drugs. So we can’t do that. And then we’d have to give up all of the gains that I’ve been talking about over the last three months. We’ve—what we have done is incredible. We’re setting records. All over the world, no matter where you go, nobody has done what we’ve been able to do.So we’re setting records in jobs. We’re setting records in numbers. And you’re going to see some very big numbers. Third-quarter numbers are coming out right before a very special day, November 3rd. So you have the numbers coming out, and they’re, I think, going to be fantastic. You know, I think they’re going to be fantastic.The best numbers of all, if somebody doesn’t come along and raise taxes—double, triple, quadruple your taxes—will be the numbers from next year. But you’re going to have a good third-quarter number coming out. And I think it’s going to be hard for even the media to disparage that number.Biden wants to surrender our country to the virus, he wants to surrender our families to the violent left-wing mob, and he wants to surrender our jobs to China—our jobs and our economic wellbeing. I’ve taken in billions and billions of dollars from China. No other President has done what I’ve done. I’ve given much of it to the farmers. I’ve given it to farmers and manufacturers, but I’ve given most of it to the U.S. Treasury. Nobody has done that. We haven’t taken in 10 cents from China ever.They targeted our farmers, and I targeted them. And I gave $28 billion to our farmers. Our farmers wouldn’t be existent right now. Right now, they’re very happy. In fact, they’re setting records on purchases. China is purchasing more corn than they’ve ever done. Record purchase of corn and soybeans, beef—because they know I’m not happy with them. They know I’m not happy at all.And, frankly, I don’t want to set the world necessarily to thinking too much about it right now, but there’s been no country anywhere, at any time, that’s ripped us off like China has. We lose billions and billions of dollars for years and years, decades. We’ve lost billions and billions and billions of dollars by dealing with China. We get nothing from China. They get nothing, other than loss, other than giving our money. And they take that money, and they build their military. And you see they’re building up a powerful military. And it’s very lucky that I’ve been building our up, because otherwise we’d be dwarfed right now by China. We would be a terrible thing. A terrible thing.We’re way ahead on the nuclear front. We’ve upgraded our nuclear. Hope to God we never have to use it. But we would be in a position that we are not in right now. But China is spending the money we give them to build up their military. So when you mention the world “decouple,” it’s an interesting word. So we lose billions of dollars, and if we didn’t do business with them, we wouldn’t lose billions of dollars. It’s called “decoupling.” So you’ll start thinking about it. You’ll start thinking.They take our money, and they spend it on building airplanes and building ships and building rockets and missiles. And Biden has been just a pawn for them. He’s been so easy. They dream about Biden. There was a report today that they hope that Joe Biden becomes President. If Joe Biden becomes President, China will own the United States, and every other country will be smiling also. They’ll be smiling.When reports come out that certain countries don’t really like me too much, that’s not because of my personality, although it could be that also, frankly. It’s because of the fact that I’ve been very tough on countries that have been ripping us off for so many years.If you look at NATO, with the exception of eight countries—we’re one of them—every country is way behind. They’re delinquent, especially Germany, in paying their NATO bills. That means we end up paying it, and we’re not doing it. I told them; we’re not doing it. And they’ve increased their spending now $130 billion, going up to $400 billion a year. It’s all because of me. Then you hear the country doesn’t like me. I mean, I can understand that, because President Obama and other presidents, in all fairness, would go in there and they’d make a speech and they’d leave. I went in there, I looked, and I said, “This is unfair. We’re paying for NATO.” We’re paying for NATO. Almost all of it.So they rip us off on the military and then they rip us off, with the European Union, on trade. And Biden doesn’t have a clue. You know he doesn’t have a clue. Everybody knows he doesn’t have a clue. In primetime, he wasn’t good. And now it’s not primetime.He spent 47 years sending American jobs to China, to Mexico, and to other countries, while collecting millions of dollars in campaign and super PAC contributions from global corporations that got rich by making American workers poor.His son, “Where is Hunter?”—Where is Hunter?—I call him “Where is Hunter?”—walked away with one and a half billion dollars to manage, even though he never did that before. He walked away with a fortune from Ukraine, from China, and from other countries. Between his son and his brother, you ought to read the statements. And the press doesn’t pick that up. If I ever did that, it would be—it would be hell, even worse than it’s been. Okay? Even worse than it’s been.What he’s done is so incredible. “I won’t give them the billion dollars,” he says. “I won’t give them, unless they get rid of that prosecutor.” And then, voila, they got rid of the prosecutor. And the press doesn’t even want to talk about it. You talk about quid pro quo. With me, there was none. With him, he’s right on tape, and you don’t want to cover it. You should be ashamed of yourselves. The press should be ashamed of themselves.But Biden shipped away our jobs, threw open our borders, and sent our youth to fight in these crazy endless wars. And it’s one of the reasons the military—I’m not saying the military is in love with me; the soldiers are. The top people in the Pentagon probably aren’t because they want to do nothing but fight wars so that all of those wonderful companies that make the bombs and make the planes and make everything else stay happy.But we’re getting out of the endless wars; you know how we’re we doing. We defeated 100 percent of the ISIS caliphate—100 percent. When I was in—when I came in, it was a mess; it was all over. They have it, in a certain color, all ISIS. A year later, I said, “Where is it?” “It’s all gone, sir. Because of you, it’s all gone,” because of my philosophy. But all gone. And I said, “That’s good. Let’s bring our soldiers back home. Some people don’t like to come home. Some people like to continue to spend money.” One cold-hearted globalist betrayal after another, and that’s what it was.Biden supported NAFTA. He supported China’s entry into the World Trade Organization. Two disasters. The most disastrous trade deals in history, both of them. I can’t tell you which was worse; they were both terrible.And as you know, I ended it, and I ended NAFTA. And we’re looking at the World Trade Organization. They’ve become much better—I will say that. We—World Health, I got out of because we’re spending $500 million. China was spending $38 million, and China controlled it. But World Trade, we’re looking at it. They’ve been very nice to us lately, I will say that—amazingly. We never used to win anything at the World Trade; would lose every case. Now, all of a sudden, we’re winning a lot of cases. We just won $7 billion as a case. And they’re talking to us much differently than they used to, because if they don’t shape up, we’re going to ship out. That’s all. We’re not treated fairly.China is treated as a developing nation. Developing nation. We’re treated as a nation that’s fully developed. We’re not fully developed, as far as I’m concerned—when you look around at Portland and you see what these Democrats are doing to our cities. Take a look at what’s happening in New York and Chicago, where you have Democrat-run cities and mayors that are running, and governors that are running states so badly, and mayors running cities so badly. It’s very sad to look at it. It’s Democrat-run, every one of them that I see. I guess we could probably find one or two that aren’t. But I don’t—so far, I haven’t been able to.If you look at Biden, he supported TPP, Trans-Pacific Partnership, which would have been a disaster; it would have destroyed our automobile business. By the way, many plants are being built right now—auto plants—in Michigan, just like I said. They’re being built in Ohio; they’re being built in South Carolina, North Carolina. They’re being built all over and expanded at a level that we’ve never seen before, because I said to Japan and Germany and others: “Sorry, you got to come here and build plants. Otherwise, we’re going to have to make it very tough on you with tariffs.”And we got out of the horrible Paris Climate Accord that he’ll go back into because, you know, it sounds wonderful. It’s a disaster for this country. They’ve basically taken away your wealth, the Paris Climate Accord. And the other countries don’t have to adhere to it. China doesn’t kick in until 2030; they don’t have to do anything until 2030. We had very high standards. We would have had to close, under some scenarios, 25 percent of our businesses in order to qualify under this ridiculous Paris Climate Accord. It sounds good. It was very bad, very expensive.The New York Times has just published an entire story on Biden’s China sell-outs, which is amazing for the New York Times. I appreciate that. In 2001, Biden said, “The United States welcomes the emergence of a prosperous, integrated China on the global stage because we expect this is going to be a China that plays by the rules.” They didn’t play by the rules. They didn’t play by the rules.The World Trade Organization, one of the reasons it’s so bad is that China didn’t play by the rules. We did. We did. But their rules were easier because they’re considered a developing nation, so they had a much lower standard. But even that, they didn’t play by the rules. That’s when they became a rocket ship. They were flat-lined for years and years and years. Then they joined the World Trade Organization. And, frankly, they cheated. Okay? They cheated. I’ll say it. What difference does it make? I feel much differently. I feel I made a great trade deal with China. Great. And they’re buying. You know why they’re buying? Because they know I’m not happy. That’s why they’re buying. And I talk about it because today is Labor Day, and it’s a good to time talk about when we’re being ripped off by countries. But nobody is even close to China.Biden cheered China’s rise as a great power “because great powers adhere to international norms in the areas of nonproliferation, human rights, and trade.” Well, they didn’t. They took advantage of stupid people. Stupid people. And Biden is a stupid person. You know that. You’re not going to write it. But you know that.The cost of Biden’s economic treachery was 60,000 shuttered American factories. And I heard this morning the real number is probably 70,000—70,000 shuttered American factories. And he’s talking about how wonderful it is with China. No, China has been very bad, on top of which we had the China plague sent to us and other viruses—nothing near this serious—but the swine, and we had other viruses sent in over the years that came from China. I wonder why.If Biden wins, China wins, because China will own this country. If Biden wins, China will own this country, and hopefully you’re not going to be able to find that out. It’s the most important election in our history, right now. Most important election in our history.Under my administration, we will make America into the manufacturing superpower of the world, and we’ll end our reliance on China once and for all. Whether it’s decoupling or putting in massive tariffs like I’ve been doing already, we’re going to end our reliance on China because we can’t rely on China. And I don’t want them building a military like they’re building right now, and they’re using our money to build it.We’ll manufacture our critical medical supplies in the United States. We’ll create “Made in America” tax credits and bring our jobs back from China to the United States. And we’ll impose tariffs on companies that desert America to create jobs in China and other countries. If they can’t do it here, then let them pay a big tax to build it someplace else and send it into our country. We’ll prohibit federal contracts from companies that outsource to China. And we’ll hold China accountable for allowing the virus to spread around the world.Now you can understand why China would much rather see Sleepy Joe than Donald Trump. But as long as I’m President, we will never waver in our undying loyalty to the American worker and to our country as a whole.So, Happy Labor Day, everybody. Yeah. Go ahead.Q: Thanks, Mr. President. The issue of what happened when you were in France continues to be a story.THE PRESIDENT: You’re going to have to take that off, please. Just—you can take it off. Your health—how many feet are you away?Q: I’ll speak a lot louder.THE PRESIDENT: Well, if you don’t take it off, you’re very muffled. So if you would take it off, it would be a lot easier.Q: I’ll just speak a lot louder. Is that better?THE PRESIDENT: It’s better, yeah. It’s better.Q: Mr. President, some people are having a hard time believing your denials of the Atlantic story because of what you said about John McCain in the past. Do you understand that? And have you asked John Kelly —THE PRESIDENT: No, I don’t understand that.Q: And have you asked John Kelly to refute that story?THE PRESIDENT: No, I don’t understand it at all, no, because I’ve always been on the opposite side of John McCain. John McCain liked wars. I will be a better warrior than anybody, but when we fight a war, we’re going to win them. And, frankly, I was never a fan of John McCain. You know that; that’s been very obvious. I was—but I had to approve his entire—his funeral. I wanted him to get—he deserved a first-class—you know, and it all was approved by me. We sent Air Force One to pick up the casket—a lot of things.But, no, I was never a fan of John McCain because he wanted the endless wars, and I didn’t. I thought that the way the vets were taken care of—our great vets—was not good, not appropriate. And, of course, he took the fake, dirty dossier and gave it over to the FBI. So this is not somebody—am I supposed to say, “What a wonderful guy”?So, you know what? I lived with him. He lived with me. But we had different philosophies. I think my philosophy is right. I think it’s turned out to be right. But I wasn’t a fan. But I respect people, and I respect a lot of people. That doesn’t mean I necessarily have to agree with them, and I didn’t agree with him on a lot of things.The story is a hoax, written by a guy who has got a tremendously bad history. The magazine itself—which I don’t read, but I hear it’s just totally anti-Trump; he’s a big Obama person, he’s a big Clinton person. And he made up the story. It’s a totally made-up story.In fact, I was very happy to see Zach Fuentes came out and said now he’s—that’s—I think that’s number 15—and these are people that were there. That’s the 15th person. General Kellogg, everybody that was there knew what happened. And so I was happy to see that Zach came out and said it’s not true. He just came out.And it’s a disgrace. Who would say a thing like that? Only an animal would say a thing like that. There is nobody that has more respect for not only our military, but for people that gave their lives in the military. There’s nobody—and I think John Kelly knows that. I think he would know that. I think he knows that from me.But Zach Fuentes, as you know, worked for John. And I think they both know that. But Zach came out, as you know, today or yesterday, last night, and said very strongly that he didn’t hear anything like that. Even John Bolton came out and said that was untrue.Now, what was true is that we had the worst weather. I think it was as bad a rain as I’ve just about ever seen. And it was a fog you—you literally couldn’t see. I walked out, and I didn’t have—I didn’t need somebody to tell me. I walked out and I said, “There’s no way we can take helicopters in this.” I understand helicopters very well. And they said, “No, sir, that’s been cancelled.”They would have had to go—Secret Service, I have the whole list—they would have had through a very, very busy section, during the day, of Paris. They would have had to go through the city. The Paris police were asking us, “Please don’t do it,” because they’re not ready. When you do that, you need a lot of time. They take days and days and days to prepare for that.I wanted to do it very badly. I was willing to sit in the car for two hours, three hours, four hours. I didn’t care. It didn’t matter. And I had nothing else to do. I went there for that; I had nothing else to do. It was ended because of the terrible weather, and nobody was prepared to go through, in terms of Paris, the police, the military, and the Secret Service. And they came out very strongly and said, “Sir, we can’t allow you to make this trip.” If I wanted to: “Sir, we can’t allow you, from a safety standpoint.”It was a phony story, just like the dirty dossier—the fake, dirty dossier; just like the Russia collusion; just like all of the other phony stories. And there’ll be more phony stories.But I do appreciate Zach coming out. But Zach now is the 15th person that’s denied it. Zach now, I think, also talked about the weather aspect of it. And he’s probably the 14th or 15th person that blamed it on weather. So that’s enough of that.Yes, please.Q: Thank you. Christina Bobb, One America News. Thank you for holding the briefing.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.Q: We’re seeing judges, most recently in Detroit, limit police ability to use non-lethal force. My first question would be: Should the police be allowed to use non-lethal force to quell the violence in their cities?THE PRESIDENT: We’re talking about where? Non-lethal force?Q: Right. So in the riots, most recently —THE PRESIDENT: The riots?Q: Yeah.THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think what’s happened is the—the toughness. These are Democrat-run cities, all. And there’s no—there’s no retribution. There’s no—they stand there, they throw things at the people that are supposed to be protecting something, and nothing happens. They throw rocks. They throw cans of soup. They throw lots of hard objects. And rarely does anything happen.But I’ve told, when we have the federal in there—as you know, I told the U.S. Marshals to go get the man who killed a—another man. And they know who it was, and you have to arrest him. You have to arrest him. After two and a half days, they didn’t arrest him. The U.S. Marshals went in, and it ended up being a gunfight, and the man was killed. But this is a man that had a bad record, and this is a man that killed a man in the street. I mean, I witnessed it; most people witnessed it. And the U.S. Marshals went in; they weren’t playing games. They can’t play games. If somebody is breaking the law, there’s got to be a form of retribution.I watch—so often, when I watch some of the areas that we’re talking about—now we have Rochester—that’s, again, Democrat governor, Democrat mayor. All Democrats, every one of them, and it always will be.I was with the governor in Texas; he looked at me and said, “I can’t imagine how they allow this to happen.” And, you know, it’s different. It’s different. I could talk about other governors saying the same thing.Yeah, please, go ahead.Q: If I could follow up on that. We’re also hearing reports of groups like Antifa and Black Lives Matter traveling around the country, leaving their home cities to go riot and protest in other cities where they’re causing damage.THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q: Do we expect to see prosecution or charges —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q—from the Department of Justice for those traveling for that purpose?THE PRESIDENT: So we have now over 1,000 people—federal—in jail. We’re prosecuting many people. A big thing was when I signed the law putting people in jail, if you knock down monuments. That was three months ago. There hasn’t been a federal monument knocked down in three months, or even thought about. I don’t think they’ve even thought about it. So that’s had a very big impact—a very big impact.But, yeah, we’re going around, and the nice part is you people take—see those people up there?—they take nice pictures of everybody, so we don’t even have to bother. We can use the news photos. We had a photo right over there of Andrew Jackson, the monument. He was getting ready, and this guy was a big, brave guy, and he was up like this, and he was showing off to all his friends. And he got arrested, and so did a lot of other people get arrested. And I would say we have the ultimate proof. Now, in that case, we got there before they ripped down the statue of Andrew Jackson, which is so beautiful, which is right over there. But they never got it.But right after that, I signed a—an order saying you go to prison for 10 years. And as soon as I signed that order, that was the end of the statues coming down. But they have other ideas. They’ve—they’ve got plenty of ideas. They’re not at want for ideas.Please, go ahead.Q: Mr. Spunt—David Spunt from Fox News. Mr. Trump—Mr. President, thank you for taking my question. Sir, you talked a lot about the economy and touted the economy. Three weeks ago, in Bedminster, I asked you specifically why you have not called Democratic leadership in the White House to meet with them. If they don’t want to meet, it’s on them.A lot of people are criticizing you. I cover you on the weekends and stuff. You’re —THE PRESIDENT: I don’t think they are.Q—doing a lot of golfing. Why have you not met with them in person?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q: I mean, we’re in September. There is no deal. There is no hope of a deal.THE PRESIDENT: I know. I know.Q: We’re two months out from the election. What do you say to —THE PRESIDENT: Don’t say there’s “no hope.” Why do you say there’s “no hope”?Q: But what can you say to the millions —THE PRESIDENT: What do you know?Q: Well, what can you say—it doesn’t seem —THE PRESIDENT: What do you know?Q: It doesn’t seem like there’s hope, sir.THE PRESIDENT: And let me just tell you: I know my customers; that’s what I do. I know Pelosi, I know Schumer very well. They don’t want to make a deal because they think it’s good for politics if they don’t make a deal. This has nothing to do with anything other than you have to know who you’re dealing with. I do. These are people that I don’t have a lot of respect. I don’t think they have a lot of respect for the American people. And I know who I’m dealing with.And I don’t need to meet with them to be turned down. They don’t want to make a deal because they know that’s good for the economy. And if they make a deal that’s good for the economy, and therefore it’s good for me for the election in November—November 3rd, and therefore they’re not going to make a deal.Now, if we gave the store away, if we bailed out all of their Democrat-run cities where we give them a trillion dollars, which is the kind of money they want—they want a trillion dollars to bail out badly run, Democrat cities and states. Whether it’s New York or Illinois or others, they want to bail them out. And we’re saying, “Well, we’re not going to pay that kind of a price in order to bail the cities out.” We’ll do something to help cities, but that’s going to have to rest on its own.And why didn’t you do this at the beginning? Because they could have done it at the beginning. So I know who I’m dealing with.And I’m on the phone with Mnuchin and with Meadows and with all of these people constantly, you know, while they’re there. But I also know when it’s time to meet with people. I’ve done very well with deals, okay? That’s what I do. And I know when it’s time to meet. But I don’t have to meet them in order to be turned down and in order for them to walk out to the sticks—which is the microphones—and give you people a false report of what just took place in the Oval Office.So they don’t want to make a deal because they think that if the country does as badly as possible, even though a lot of people are being hurt, that’s good for the Democrats. But, David, that’s a bad thing.Yeah, please. Go ahead.Q: But as President, shouldn’t you take the high road, sir?THE PRESIDENT: I am taking the high road. I’m taking the high road by not seeing them. That’s the high road.Yeah.Q: And you —Q: Thank you, Mr. President. David —THE PRESIDENT: And if I thought it made a difference or would make a difference, I’d do it in a minute.Yeah. Go ahead.Q: Yeah, David Jackson, USA Today. My question is about the Durham report, which you have talked about recently. You said, “Let’s see what happens.” Now, you’ve accused people of committing crimes against you during the Russia investigation —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Sure. Sure.Q: –including President Obama and Joe Biden.THE PRESIDENT: They spied on my campaign. That’s right.Q: Because my question is —THE PRESIDENT: They spied on my campaign. And if they were Democrats, they would have been in jail two years ago. They would have been in jail—literally, if this side were the Democrat side, they would have been in jail two years ago for 50-year terms for treason and other things.Q: But excuse me, my question is: Do you want the Justice Department to indict people over this?THE PRESIDENT: I’m not going to say that. I have to see the report. I haven’t seen—I purposely—I don’t know if that was a good thing, smart thing. I don’t know. But nobody can complain about it. I have every right to have been very much involved, and maybe someday I’ll get involved in it.They spied on my campaign, and that includes Biden and Obama. They spied on my campaign trying to defeat me. They wrote up a fake dossier that has proven to be totally fake—written by Christopher Steele, paid for by Hillary Clinton and the Democrats—and they used that illegally in the FISA courts.If we did what they did, you would have many people in jail all right—right now. And you have, other than the one agent that admitted his guilt that he forged documents—we don’t have that yet, but the report hasn’t been issued yet. Let’s see what happens.Q: It sure sounds like you want to prosecute people.THE PRESIDENT: But let me just—let me just tell you something: President Obama and Biden—Sleepy Joe, he knew everything that was happening. They were spying on my campaign, and they got caught. Now let’s see what happens.But if this were the opposite way, people would have been jailed. They would have been in jail already for a period of at least—it would have started two years ago, and it would have been 50 years for treason, because you can’t do that. That’s never—and nothing like that’s ever happened before. Then they created, at tremendous expense—the money they paid is tremendous; I’m sure you know the money that was paid, millions of dollars. They created a fake dossier—a fake dossier—proven to be, now, fake. Everyone—and they used it in the FISA courts. That’s a crime.Q: But it sure sounds like you want to prosecute —THE PRESIDENT: So far, I haven’t seen anybody have a problem. But the report hasn’t been issued yet. Let’s see what happens with the Durham report.But this started at Obama, and some people would say—and some people, “Well, but he was President,” like, “Let’s leave him alone.” If it were me, they wouldn’t be leaving me alone, I can tell you. It’s a totally double standard, and it’s a—it’s a disgrace.And if I were a Republican senator and if I were a Republican congressman—and we have some great ones, but we have a lot of them that don’t fight the way that the other side fights. We have much better policy. We have much better things going for us, like borders and walls and immigration and no sanctuary cities. And a lot—they have a lot of bad stuff going, but they’re dirty fighters.And the dirtiest fight of all is the issuance of 80 million ballots, unrequested. They’re not requested; they’re just sending 80 million ballots all over the country. Eighty million ballots, non-requested. I call them “unsolicited ballots.” That’s going to be the dirtiest fight of all. People are going to get ballots; they’re going to say, “What am I doing?” And then they’re going to harvest. They’re going to do all the things.And if you look at the last period of six months—take a look at the races where they’ve sent ballots out. Take a look at Carolyn Maloney, whose race should be redone because she won that race totally unfairly to her opponent. Her opponent did very well against her. That race should be rerun, but they declared her the winner because they heard I found out about it. But take a look at what’s happened in New Jersey and in Virginia, in different places. It’s a disgrace. That’ll be a beauty.Yeah, please.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. If proven true, are you okay with Postmaster General DeJoy and the fact that he asked former employees at his private company to make donations to the GOP and then reimburse them? Are you okay with that?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, I don’t know too much about it. I read something this morning, but I don’t—other than that, I’d have to see it. He’s a very respected man. He was approved very much by both parties, I guess. It was sort of a—an approval that took place by both parties. I don’t know exactly what the story is. I’ll certainly know within a short period of time. I just read it for the first time—I read it this morning, just like you did.Q: Would you support an investigation, sir?THE PRESIDENT: Sure. Sure.Q: And in —THE PRESIDENT: I think let the investigations go. But—but he’s a very respected man. Again, it was a bipartisan commission. Postmaster general is appointed by a bipartisan commission. And we’ll see how that goes. But, no, I think he’s a very honest guy, but we’ll see.Yeah.Q: He’s proven to be a campaign —Q: Thank you, Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: Mr. President, just a follow-up, please, if you don’t mind. If it’s proven to be a campaign finance scheme, do you think he should lose his job?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. If something can be proven that he did something, always. You know?Q: Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Always. They’ve been looking at me for four years; they found nothing. Four years. Think of it: For four years—from the day I came down the escalator, I’ve been under investigation by sleaze, and they found nothing. They found nothing. A friend of mine said, “You have to be the most innocent, honorable man ever to hold the Office of President.”Think of it: They spent—just Mueller alone, he spent—I guess the real number turned out to be $48 million, but whatever it was—many, many millions of dollars. They had 18 angry Democrats looking. They had FBI agents all over the place. They had every—and they have no collusion. Friends of mine have said—sophisticated friends have said, “You’ve got to be the most innocent guy ever to hold this office.” And there’s a lot of truth to that.Yeah, please.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. After Navalny poisoning, Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany is under pressure to cancel Nord Stream 2 pipeline from Russia to Germany. Would you support such a move?THE PRESIDENT: Sure.Q: Do you think that the project should be canceled?THE PRESIDENT: Sure. Well, I’ve been support-—I’ve been supportive of that. I was the first one that brought it up. You never heard of Nord Stream 2 until Trump came along.When I came along, I said, “Wait a minute. We’re protecting Germany from Russia, right?” NATO. “We’re protecting Germany from Russia. Germany is paying Russia billions and billions of dollars to get their energy.” And the real number is probably 60 to 70 percent, ultimately, of their energy is going to come from Russia. And I said this for years, that nobody talks about it. One of the many things, between sanctions and all of the—what we’ve done for Ukraine, relative to what the past—they used to send pillows, and we sent tank busters. But I brought that up a long time ago. Russia is unhappy that I brought it up. But you never heard of Nord Stream 2; nobody did, until I got elected.And I said, “Why is Germany making a deal to give billions of dollars to Russia, and then we’re protecting Germany from Russia? How does that work?” And then, on top of it, Germany is delinquent because they’re only paying a little more than 1 percent and they’re supposed to be paying 2 percent, and even the 2 percent is low. But just remember: Trump—me—I got the countries of NATO to spend one point—$130 billion, going to $400 billion a year. Think of it: $400 billion a year more for NATO.And the purpose of NATO primarily is Europe protection against Russia. Now, they can use it for other, I guess—and they have a little bit in the Middle East, et cetera, et cetera.But I’m the one that did that. So—but nobody talks about that. Nobody talks about Nord Stream 2.The answer is: Absolutely, if they feel that something happens. But I don’t know that Germany is in a position right now, because Germany is in a very weakened position, energy wise. They’re closing all their plants. They’re closing their nuclear. They’re closing their coal. They’re closing a lot of plants. And they are—they have put themselves in a very bad position, frankly. Very, very bad position.Yeah, please.Q: Mr. President, can I follow up Jeff Mason’s question? Have you asked John Kelly to publicly refute The Atlantic? And then, can I ask something else?THE PRESIDENT: No, I have nothing against John. I have nothing against anybody. No.I was very heartened to see that a friend of his—because I know Zach is a friend of his and worked for him—I was very heartened to see that Zach Fuentes came out with the statement that he did—I guess, late last night—that it was not true.Q: Can I ask another question on a different topic, Mr. President? Mr. President, what exactly is un-American about federal government training programs that are aimed at improving inclusivity or pointing out biases?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we’re going to do a report. Yeah, I fired those people; they’re all gone. And it was a disgrace, frankly. And we’re going to give you a big report that’s going to make you very happy.All right, yeah, please.Q: Thank you. Darlene Superville, AP. You said a moment ago, “They’ll say anything.” You were talking about Joe Biden and Kamala Harris and their comments about the vaccine. You have asserted —THE PRESIDENT: No, they say worse; they say negative. They say negative. They’re going to make the vaccine into a negative so that when we have it—and I spoke to the head of Pfizer, I spoke to the head of Johnson &amp; Johnson, I spoke to the head of the greatest medical companies in the world. We’re doing great. We’re going to have it soon.Q: Right —THE PRESIDENT: Wait a minute. So now what they’re saying is, “Oh, wow, this is bad news. President Trump is getting this vaccine in record time.” By the way, if this were the Obama administration, you wouldn’t have that vaccine for three years, and you probably wouldn’t have it all.So we’re going to have a vaccine very soon, maybe even before a very special date. You know what date I’m talking about.Q: Yes.THE PRESIDENT: But let me just tell you—wait. And what they’re doing, because they think it is going fast. And if you talk to a lot of your sources—if you have sources—if you talk to your sources in the FDA, you’ll see it’s going very, very well. The numbers are looking unbelievably strong, unbelievably good.So now they’re saying, “Wow, Trump has pulled this off. Okay, let’s disparage the vaccine.” That’s so bad for this country. That’s so bad for the world to even say that. And that’s what they’re saying.But I watched Kamala’s poll numbers drop from 15 to almost zero, and then drop out even before she ran in Iowa because people didn’t like her, and I understand why. She will never be President—although I have to be careful, because Obama used to say that about me. So I have to be a little bit careful.Q: Right, but —THE PRESIDENT: But you have to look at her a little bit more closely, because obviously Joe is not doing too well. So you’re going to have to look at her a little bit too closely.But she’s talking about disparaging a vaccine so that people don’t think the achievement was a great achievement. I don’t want the achievement for myself, I want something that’s going to make people better, that people aren’t going to get sick with. That includes therapeutics, where we’re doing equally as well. Therapeutics.Q: May I finish? May I finish the question?THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.Q: Your point is that: What they’re saying is that they’re saying it for a political purposes.THE PRESIDENT: Yes.Q: You have asserted repeatedly that a vaccine will be on the market by—before the election, by the end of October.THE PRESIDENT: No, I didn’t say—I didn’t say “they will.” I said, “By the end of the year.”Q: Aren’t you doing the same thing that you —THE PRESIDENT: No, but you’re not quoting me accurately.Q—say they’re guilty of?THE PRESIDENT: I said that vaccines will be on the market before the end of year, but they may even be on the market—they may even be developed and fully developed, tested, and everything else.You know, we have 30,000 people, in just one vaccine right now, under test in very, very highly infected areas. So we’re going to be able to get a good result, one way or the other, very soon.So I didn’t say what you said. What I said is “by the end of the year.” But I think it could even be sooner than that. It could be during the month of October, actually. Could be before November.Q: But aren’t you also saying that for political reasons?THE PRESIDENT: No, I’m saying that because we want to save a lot of lives. The fast—with me, it’s: The faster, the better. With somebody else, maybe they would say it politically, but I’m saying it in terms of this is what we need. We have to have—if get the vaccine early, that’s a great thing, whether it’s politics or not.Now, do benefits inure if you’re able to get something years ahead of schedule? I guess, maybe they do. But the most important thing to me is saving lives; it’s the most important thing.Yeah, go ahead. In the back.Q: Hi. Just based on some of your recent tweets, do you —THE PRESIDENT: You sound so clear as opposed to everybody else, where they refuse.Q: Your tweets about the 1619 Project —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q—why do you object to that being taught in schools? And do you object to slavery itself being taught in schools?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, so—no, I want everybody to know everything they can about our history. I’m not a believer in cancel culture, the good or the bad. If you don’t study the bad, it could happen again. So I do want that subject studied very, very carefully and very accurately.But we grew up with a certain history, and now they’re trying to change our history—revisionist history. That’s why they want to take down our monuments. That’s why they want to take down our statues.I saw something the other day, which was absolutely horrendous: Washington Monument, they want to rename it—the D.C. committee, but the D.C. committee is all Democrats. Abraham Lincoln, Thomas Jefferson—I mean, we’re talking about—this is the big stuff now. This is the big stuff. And they want to rename it. They want to re-designate it. They want to take some down. No, we don’t do that. Never going to happen with me, I guarantee you that.Well, I want to thank you all, and I just want to wish you a very happy Labor Day. And we’re having tremendous success, whether it’s on the vaccines, whether it’s on the pandemic—the plague that came in from China, that China should have never let happen because I will never feel the same about China. And I just want to again wish you a happy Labor Day.Thank you very much, everybody. Thank you very much everybody. Thank you, and good afternoon. My administration has been working around the clock in good faith to reach an agreement with Democrats on additional China virus relief.Already, my administration has enacted over $3 trillion in historic relief, saving many tens of millions of dollars and jobs. And you see how fast the economy is coming back. It does look like it’s going to be a very sharp “V.” We have tremendous enthusiasm, tremendous spirit, and tremendous job growth. We set a record on number of jobs in the last three months. It’s the most jobs ever created in a three-month period—during a three-month period. That’s great.Before we begin, I’ve just signed two bills that are great for our vets. Our vets are very special. We passed Choice, as you know—Veterans Choice—and Veterans Accountability. And they’ve been trying to get that passed for decades and decades and decades, and no President has ever been able to do it. And we got it done so veterans have Choice. And now you have Accountability—that if you don’t love your vets, if you’re in the VA and you don’t love the vets or take care of the vets, you can actually get fired if you don’t do your job. We want people that love our vets.The first expands the eligibility for vets with blindness in both eyes. So we have an expansion of benefits, an expansion of various elements of being and working with the VA for vets with blindness and—in particular, blindness in both eyes. And we have a lot of problems with blindness in the VA, and we’re doing something about it. They’ve been talking about this for many years. So that is expanding eligibility for vets with blindness in both eyes. Okay?Second is—requires the VA to establish a treatment court program for vets who need treatment rather than punishment for certain nonviolent crimes. And you know what that all means, and it’s really something that they’ve been trying to get done for a long time. The second requires the VA to establish a treatment court. So this is a treatment court program for vets who need treatment rather than punishment for certain nonviolent crimes. Okay? I think it’s self-explanatory.We’ve wanted this for a long time, they’ve been trying to get it for a long time, and now we have it. And I want to thank everybody for helping us get that done. We had a lot of support from a lot of great people, including people in the VA.In the current negotiations, we have repeatedly stated our willingness to immediately sign legislation providing expanded unemployment benefits, protecting Americans from eviction, and providing additional relief payments to families. Democrats have refused these offers; they want to negotiate. What they really want is bailout money for states that are run by Democrat governors and mayors, and that have been run very badly for many, many years—and many decades, in fact. You know the states; everybody knows who we’re talking about and what we’re talking about. I don’t think we have to go over it.But what the Democrats primarily want is bailout money. It has nothing to do with the China virus. It has nothing to do with anything that we’ve been talking about over the last period of time. They want to bailout states that have been badly managed by Democrats, badly run by Democrats for many years—and, in fact, in all cases, many decades. And we’re not willing to do that.Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer have chosen to hold this vital assistance hostage on behalf of very extreme partisan demands and the radical-left Democrats, and we just can’t do that. So, hopefully, we can do something with them at a later date, but we’re going to be signing some bills in a little while that are going to be very important, and will take care of, pretty much, this entire situation.As we know it and as you have been covering it in some cases—actually covering it accurately—many of the far-left policies they’re pushing have nothing to do, again, with what we have been working on so hard—namely, the corona. You can call it so many different names. What a horrible thing China released upon the world.One third of their bill—the Heroes Act—is spending completely unrelated money to the virus. Here are just a few of the policies in their extreme-left bill. And, again, this is a bill supported by Biden, and Biden is totally controlled now by the Bernie Sanders left wing of the party. And, in fact, he’s gone further left than Bernie Sanders ever dreamt of going. So, obviously, other than Bernie have brought him left. If you look at the manifesto that they’ve agreed to, it’s far further left than I’ve ever heard anything about Bernie Sanders.The massive taxpayer bailout of badly run blue states we talked about—that’s one of the things they’re looking to do. Measures designed to increase voter fraud. Banning voter ID; they want to ban voter ID. We should have voter ID in every state. Every state should have voter ID. You have ID on everything you do, practically, yet every-—everybody has voter ID. Everybody has ID except for voters. When you vote, you don’t want ID; they don’t want —We have some states with it; it works out great. And if you want to stop fraud in elections, have voter ID. They want measures designed to increase voter fraud, which is banning voter ID in all states and banning requirements for signature verification in federal elections.Now, why would they want, in this bill—which really has nothing to do with what we’re talking about: stimulus—something banning voter ID? In every single state, they want to ban it, including states where we already have it, because we have some states where we have it—Indiana and others that do very well.Why would they want to ban voter ID in all states? And why would they want to ban requirements for signature verification in federal election? Who would want a bill banning signature verification? What’s that all about?You know what it’s about? Fraud. That’s what they want: fraud. They want to try and steal this election because, frankly, it’s the only way they can win the election.The bill also requires all states to do universal mail-in balloting—which nobody is—nobody is prepared for—regardless of whether or not they have the infrastructure. They want to steal an election. That’s all this is all about: They want to steal the election.So, in the bill, they have a bill that requires all states to do universal mail-in balloting, regardless of whether or not they have the infrastructure. Like in Nevada, it’s such a disaster. Their infrastructure is a total disaster. They don’t want to have signature verification, they don’t want to have any of the safeguards that you need, and they don’t want to have safeguards that are so common and so basic and even other states that we disagree with have. This Nevada thing is a mess, but we’ll see how the courts determine—what the courts determine. But they certainly don’t have the infrastructure in Nevada. So we’ll see how it is.As you know, we brought suit last week, and we’ll see how that all works out. I think we’re going to win it. But, basically, what they’re trying to do with all of these requirements, including no signature verification: They’re trying to steal an election.And I was in Ohio, I was in Texas, I was in Florida over the last four or five days. And if you would see the crowds along the highways and the roadways, people have said they’ve never seen anything like it, and they haven’t seen anything like it. And the press doesn’t report it because they’re fake news.They even want to force states to implement the controversial practice known as “ballot harvesting”—a very dangerous practice—meaning they would allow Democrat Party operatives to deposit thousands and thousands of completed ballots at the post office without any verification of who filled them out, including a verification of signatures on the ballots. So you’re not even going to have a verified signature. Anybody—I could sign it. You could sign it. Anybody in this room could sign it. And that’s going to count as a vote. How can you do a thing like this?So this is what they’re asking for. This is what Nancy Pelosi and Crying Chuck Schumer are asking for.Okay? It’s ridiculous. It’s horrible. It’s a horrible thing.The Democrat bill includes stimulus checks for illegal aliens. So if you were able to get into our country illegally—and our border is, as you know, doing very well right now. We have a very strong border, and the wall is up to 276 miles. And we’ll be completed with it around the end of the year. We’re going to do some extra mileage in certain areas that people didn’t realize were so bad, so we’ll be completed with it. Right after, we’re going to do the additional mileage. We’ll do it probably a little bit after the year.I think, from what I’ve heard, Joe Biden—Sleepy Joe—wants to rip the wall down. He wants people to pour into our country. They want to have open borders. We don’t want to have open borders.So the Democrat bill includes stimulus checks for illegal aliens. They require the mass release of illegal aliens from detention. They also compel the mass release of inmates, including serious felons. How do you like that one? And this is in the bill that we’re talking about? What does this have to do with stimulus, the economy? What does this have to do with the coronavirus? Another name. What does this have to do with this?So, think of that: They required the mass release of illegal aliens from detention. What does this have to do with what we’re trying to do? They want to put this—and this is a radical-left policy, so they can go to Portland and try and rip the place apart that they’ve been doing for many years and they’ve been doing for years and years.They also compel the mass release of inmates. What does this have to do with what we’re talking about? This is Nancy Pelosi—Crazy Nancy—and Chuck Schumer. They want to compel you to do this stuff, and this has nothing to do with what we’re talking about, and it includes serious felons. They want to have these people released on a mass basis, including serious felons.That’s page 1,689; page 1,762. Think of it: 1,762. And that’s nowhere near the end of their bill. They have things in there that nobody has even at the time to look at or read. These people—I don’t—I honestly don’t believe they love our country, you want to know the truth.In addition to demanding these extreme partisan provisions, Democrats are actively blocking the following measures: support for K-12 schools to help them safely open, additional funding for the Paycheck Protection Program to help millions of workers on the payroll. This is a great program. Very successful. Kept a lot of businesses open. That’s why we’re doing so well in reopening our country. Additional money for hospitals. Testing and vaccines. Direct payments of $3,400 for a family of four.Now, remember, this is what the extreme partisans—this—we got—we have to—this is what we’re talking about. Democrats are actively blocking the things that we want. And what we want is good for people. Those—these are things that they’re blocking: support for K-12 schools, so they can open. Think of that.Also, direct payments of the $3,400 for a family of four-plus, then funding for childcare and mental health care. And you need that, especially when you have so much of a lockdown. You need that: mental health care.Funding for broadband, airports, and agriculture, rental assistance, and support for community banks and credit unions to help them provide $100 billion in loans to the hardest-hit communities, including rural communities and farmers. They don’t want anybody to get that. Democrats are obstructing all of it.Therefore, I’m taking executive action. We’ve had it. And we’re going to save American jobs and provide relief to the American workers, and I’ll be signing these bills in a very short period of time.First one is on providing a payroll tax holiday to Americans earning less than $100,000 per year. In a few moments, I will sign a directive, instructing the Treasury Department to allow employers to defer payment of the employee portion of certain payroll taxes from September 1st. And we’re actually going to be making that; we just got the word. We’re just getting some word from a lot of people. We didn’t think we’d have to do this because we thought the Democrats would be reasonable, but they’ve been not only unreasonable, they’ve been ridiculous.So we’re going to make that August 1st, most likely. It’ll be August 1st. We’ll let you know the exact date, but we’re looking like August 1st. So it’d be August 1st through the end of 2020. This will mean bigger paychecks for working families, as we race to produce a vaccine and eradicate the China virus once and for all.And we’re doing very good with the numbers. You see it’s going down in Arizona very, very substantially and rapidly. Going down in California. Going down in Texas. Going down in Florida. Other areas are propping up a little bit, but we’re watching them very closely. We understand the disease, and we’re watching them very closely, especially our senior citizens and our senior citizens’ residences.If I’m victorious on November 3rd, I plan to forgive these taxes and make permanent cuts to the payroll tax. So I’m going to make them all permanent.Now, Joe Biden and the Democrats may not want that. They don’t want that because they’re adding $3 trillion in taxes. So they’ll have the option of raising everybody’s taxes and taking this away.But if I win, I may extend and terminate. In other words, I’ll extend it beyond the end of the year and terminate the tax. And so, we’ll see what happens. Biden probably won’t be doing that; you’ll have to ask him. I don’t think he knows what he’s doing.Second, I’m signing an executive order directing the Department of Housing and Urban Development, HHS, and CDC to make sure renters and homeowners can stay in their homes.So I’m protecting people from eviction. Yet you’ve been hearing a lot about eviction, and the Democrats don’t want to do anything having to do with protecting people from eviction. I said, “Let’s do that separately. That can be a totally separate thing from passing along money so people can live.” And they didn’t even want to protect people from eviction.So, they would get evicted—it’s not their fault that this virus came into our country; it’s China’s fault. And came into the world—by the way, a lot of the people, a lot of the states that were doing the best are having some problems. A lot of the states that we weren’t thinking were doing the best are doing very well.You look at some of the countries involved. Some of the countries that were really standing out as examples are now exploding. But they’ll get it down; they understand it. We’re dealing with them. We’re dealing with a lot of countries.We’re providing thousands and thousands of ventilators all over the world right now. We make a lot of ventilators. We started off with very little, and we’re making a lot. And we have thousands in our stockpile, but we’re making thousands a month. And we’re providing many of them—thousands and thousands—to other countries that would never be able to get them.The Department of Housing and Urban Development will also provide financial assistance to struggling renters and homeowners, and work with landlords and lenders to keep Americans safely in their homes. So we don’t want people being evicted. And the bill—the act that I’m signing will solve that problem, largely—hopefully, completely.The third action I’m taking today will also provide additional support for Americans who are unemployed due to the China virus. Under the CARES Act, I proudly signed expanded unemployment benefits into law. Congressional Democrats have stonewalled our efforts to extend this relief. They even oppose measures that would give bonuses to workers returning to the job. They were totally opposed to that.For this reason, I’m taking action to provide an additional or an extra $400 per week in expanded benefits: $400. Okay? So, that’s generous, but we want to take care of our people. Again, it wasn’t their fault; it was China’s fault.States will be asked to cover 25 percent of the cost using existing funding, such as the tens of billions of dollars available to them through the Coronavirus Relief Fund. Under this plan, states will be able to offer greater benefits if they so choose, and the federal government will cover 75 percent of the cost. So we’re all set up. It’s $400 per week.And we’re doing that without the Democrats. We should have been able to do it very easily with them, but they want all of these additional things that have nothing to do with helping people.Fourth, I am signing a directive providing relief to student loan borrowers. Earlier this year, we slashed student loan interest rates to zero. I don’t know if people know that because the press doesn’t ever report it, but maybe they’re watching now.The press doesn’t report a lot of good things that are good for the people and good for the country.Earlier this year, we slashed student loans’ interest rates to zero percent and suspended student loan payments, and Congress extended that policy through September 30th. Today, I’m extending this policy through the end of the year, and we’ll extend it further than that—most likely, right after December 1st. So we look like we’re going to be extending that. They’re paying zero interest. And again, not their fault that their colleges are closed down and not their fault that they’re unable to get what they bargained for.Through these four actions, my administration will provide immediate and vital relief to Americans struggling in this difficult time. And the beautiful thing about this difficult time is we’re now coming back and setting records.We’ll also ensure that our economic comeback continues full speed ahead. And with the $400 and all of the other measures that we’re talking about and will be signing in a little while, that will happen.We’re further looking at additional tax cuts, including income tax relief, income tax cuts, and capital gains tax cuts. So we’re going to be looking at that—capital gains—for the purpose of creating jobs, and income tax is self-explanatory. And it’ll be income tax for middle-income and lower-income people, but middle-income people because they pay a lot of income tax and you do have tax inequality. I’m saying that as a Republican, and you do have tax inequality.So we’re going to be looking at income tax, and we’re going to be looking at capital gains tax cuts on both, and maybe substantial. And we’ll be reporting back fairly shortly on that. That’s big news. That’s big news, but very important. We want to have our jobs flourish. We want to have our companies do great. We want to have the 401(k)s, which are now at a level—if you look at the stock market, it’s great.If you have stocks in NASDAQ, you’re higher than you ever were, including even—this is still during the pandemic. The stock market—because they see such incredible things are happening, smart people—the stock market is that almost an all-time high. We’re just short of it. And NASDAQ is higher than it ever was. It’s broken the record 14 times in the last couple of months.So, 401(k)s are doing fantastically. I hope you kept your stocks. I hope you didn’t sell. I hope you had confidence in your President and confidence that President Trump: was going to be reelected.And I will tell you this, that the biggest tailwind, the biggest problem that we have, with respect to the stock market—which is not much of a problem because it’s doing so well, but it would be actually much higher—is the possibility that these radical-left Democrats could win. And if they win, we’re going to have a crash. We’re going to have a terrible problem because they’re going to raise taxes—3 trillion dollars’ worth of taxes. And that’s going to affect everybody from middle-income to upper-income, to jobs, to companies. Your 401(k)s will go down like a rock. Your stocks will go down like a rock.You know, and don’t forget: These big companies—you have stocks in these companies. You know, you own stocks. And they have millions and millions of shareholders. And whether it’s pension funds or anybody else, you all have stocks. So there are big companies, but a lot of people own that stock, and we want to keep it going.But we do have, I guess you could say, not a tailwind; it’s a headwind—I guess would be a better description. But it is; it’s a headwind. And when you think of it, that’s—in my opinion, it would be much higher.But you look at what they want to do. They want to raise everybody’s taxes—everybody. And they want to do the Green New Deal, which will decimate our country and decimate—it’s ridiculous, too. It’s childish. I actually say the Green New Deal is childish. It’s for children. It’s not for adults.Anybody that believes in that is—I don’t know, maybe it’s politics. I don’t even think it’s good politics. They seem to think so. We’ll see how they do. But I don’t think it’s good politics, and it’ll decimate our economy.We’ve learned a great deal about this virus and how to treat it. Our strategy is to aggressively shield those at the greatest risk while allowing younger and healthier citizens to safely resume work and school.I noticed that some of the Democrats that I would say are very strongly on the left are now coming out and saying we really have to open our schools for the good of the economy. I was shocked to see a couple of them—you know they are.We urge all Americans to socially distance and avoid large crowds and all of the things that we talk about all the time. We have to—we have to go and make sure that everything is in good shape. We really are—we’re coming back very, very strong. We’re doing very well with the virus because all of those states that everybody thought would be in a bad position for a long time, they’re all coming down. Governors have done a great job.Don’t forget, we’re dealing with governors. Some have done a fantastic job. All have worked hard. Some have done a much better job than others. And someday, if you’d like to know, I’ll give you the good ones and the bad ones. We’ll give you some good ones and some bad ones.But, by contrast, the never-ending lockdown being proposed by some, mostly—I guess you could almost say “almost all”—in the Democrat Party, would inflict unimaginable harm to our people and to our health for decades to come. It’ll hurt our economy, and they view that as a good thing. They actually view that as a good thing because they’re interested in one date: November 3rd.And I actually think it’s bad politics, and I think they’re starting to come along because I’m seeing more and more people want to open up. And you see the devastating results of lockdowns, too. You know, you have depression and suicide and drugs and alcohol and bad marriages. Marriages that were very good turned out to be very bad.It’s an amazing thing, and it’s—who would think it? But people get along for 20 years; I guess they didn’t know each other very well, and now they’re not getting along.And you had the opposite, also. You’ve had people to get along better. They like each other more than they thought. That’s okay, too.That, we like. But the other situation is very, very—very, very bad.We’ll develop a vaccine. We’re going to have it very soon, and we’re ready to distribute it. And we’re—we’ve got the military ready. “Logistics,” it’s called. And we’ll end this pandemic, and we will rebuild the greatest economy in the history of the world.You know, we created the greatest economy in the history of the world—the highest stock market ever. And we’re very close to getting that back. That, I have to say, is way ahead of schedule. Highest stock market ever. Best employment numbers for African Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans.And, by the way, Hispanic Americans just set a record for new jobs. African Americans just set a record for new jobs just now—during the pandemic, the last month. And Asian Americans just set a record for new jobs. So we’re very proud of what’s happening.And I will now sign the executive action. And then, if you want, we can ask a few questions.Okay, Kelly. Yeah, let me do this first, and then you can do some questions. Thank you very much.Okay, so this is for the authorization of other needs assistance program, major disasters declaration related to the coronavirus disease.(The memorandum is signed.)Okay? So this—authority invested in me—this is the payment relief during the COVID-19 pandemic.(The memorandum is signed.)This is fighting the spread of the COVID-19 by providing assistance to renters and homeowners. We’re doing assistance.(The executive order are signed.)And this is deferral payroll tax obligations. So this is your payroll tax obligations, which we’re going to end up terminating eventually, right?(The memorandum is signed.)How many—how many pictures can you take over there?I mean, you’re taking hundreds of pictures. What are you doing?Okay.Q: Can you get at the microphone, sir?President Trump: I will. I will.So, that’s the story. Would anybody like a pen? Would anybody like a pen? Would anybody —Audience Member: I do!President Trump: Why do we hand these—we’ll hand these out to you in the back. Okay, fine.Q: Mr. President —President Trump:Yes, please.Q: Yes, sir. Can we start with the $400, sir? So I just wanted to get your reaction. So you’re saying the states will have to cover some of the costs, sir. Which governors have told you that—which governors have told you that they would sign onto it?President Trump:Well, if they don’t, they don’t. That’s up to them. But if they don’t, they don’t. That’s going to be their problem. I don’t think their people will be too happy. They have the money. So I don’t think their people will be too happy. But if they don’t, they don’t.But again, the states have the money. It’s sitting there.All right. Kelly.Q: Sir, why did you decide on $400, when previously families were receiving $600?President Trump:Yeah.Q: That will be a hardship for many. What do you say to them?President Trump: Well, no, it’s not a hardship. This is the money that they need, this is the money they want, and this gives them a great incentive to go back to work.So, this was much more than was originally agreed. The 600 was a number that was there. And as you know, they were diff-—there was difficulty with the 600 number because it really was a disincentive.Yeah. Go ahead, please.Q: Sir, the payroll tax cut was opposed by both parties on Capitol Hill. Can you give your rationale as to why you think that’s important, particularly since it doesn’t help Americans who (inaudible)?President Trump: Yeah. Okay. It helps people greatly. It helps our country get back. And anybody that would say anything different, I think, is very foolish. Everybody wanted it. By the way, the Democrats want it. The Republicans want it. They just couldn’t get it—they just couldn’t come to an agreement, but everybody wants it.And the very important thing is the people want it, and the people need it, actually.Q: Mr. President —President Trump: Yeah. Yes.Q: Mr. President, you said that this will pretty much take care of the entire situation. But, as you said, there’s not money for reopening schools, other important items. Is your administration willing to go back to Democrats to try to actually negotiate some of these big things?President Trump: Well, the answer is yes, but we have money to do other things, and we have a lot of money that was unspent, and we’ll be able to do things with the money that was unspent. We have significant money that was unspent, and we will be able to use that for different purposes.Go ahead.Q: Mr. President —President Trump: Go ahead.Q: Mr. President, when will this relief get in the hands of Americans that need it? What date?President Trump: We think it’s going to be very rapid. We want it to be very rapid. It’s going to be distributed in a way that—whichever the fastest way. There are various methods, and it will be rapidly distributed.Q: But you said you’re also expecting legal challenges with this, right? So why —President Trump: I didn’t say that. No, no. I didn’t say that.Q: Yes, you did. Yesterday, sir, you said that you were expecting legal hurdles —President Trump:I—I said I—what I said is people can do whatever they want. I guess maybe they’ll bring legal actions; maybe they won’t, but they won’t win. They won’t win.Q: But if legal action is brought against you on this, why not just work with Congress on this deal?President Trump: Well, I’m not saying they’re not going to come back and negotiate. They might very well come back and negotiate.Q: But you’re signing the executive order today, and Americans want to know when they’re going to see this relief. What date will they see it?President Trump: Very soon. They’re going to see it very soon. Look, it’s —Q: Very soon?President Trump: There it is. Right there.Q: Thirty million Americans are out of work, sir.President Trump: Excuse me. Excuse me. There it is, right there.Go ahead.Q: Mr. President, though, this is expected to be tied up in the court. So this relief is either going to be delayed or blocked indefinitely.President Trump: Oh, I don’t think so.Q: Is this just political theater?President Trump: I think this is going to go very rapidly through the courts.Q: But are you giving people false hope?President Trump: This will go very—if—if we get sued. Maybe we won’t get sued. If we get sued, it’s somebody that doesn’t want people to get money. Okay? And that’s not going to be a very popular thing.Q: But should a President be able to go around Congress? Are you trying to set a new precedent —President Trump: No. No.Q:—that President Trump: can go around Congress and decide how money is collected and spent?President Trump: You ever hear the word “obstruction”?Q: Yes. You were investigated for that.President Trump: They’ve obstructed. Congress has obstructed. The Democrats have obstructed people from getting desperately needed money.Q: But this is in the Constitution, Mr. President.President Trump: Go ahead, please. Right here.Q: Mr. President, sir —Q: Why do you keep saying that you passed Veterans —President Trump: No, no. You’re finished.Go ahead, please. Please.President Trump: Go ahead.Q: (Inaudible) Veterans Choice? It was passed in 2014.President Trump: Okay, excuse me.Go ahead, please.Q: But it’s a false statement, sir.President Trump: Okay, thank you very much everybody. Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Wow. Are you having a good time? Members of Congress, members of my cabinet, and my fellow Americans: The First Lady and I are delighted to welcome you to the second annual Salute to America.On this wonderful day, we celebrate our history, our heroes, our heritage, our great American flag, and our freedom. Happy Fourth of July to everyone.I want to thank the U.S. Army Golden Knights for that truly awe-inspiring display. Tremendous talent. The Golden Knights, and every member of the Armed Forces here this evening, we just want to say that you have earned the eternal gratitude of our entire nation.Two hundred and forty-four years ago in Philadelphia, the 56 signers of our Declaration of Independence pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to boldly proclaim this eternal truth: that we are all made equal by God.Thanks to the courage of those patriots of July 4th, 1776, the American Republic stands today as the greatest, most exceptional, and most virtuous nation in the history of the world.Our workers, our factories have revolutionized industries and lifted millions into prosperity. Our artists, architects, and engineers have inspired the globe with transcendent works of beauty. American heroes defeated the Nazis, dethroned the fascists, toppled the communists, saved American values, upheld American principles, and chased down the terrorists to the very ends of the Earth. We are now in the process of defeating the radical left, the Marxists, the anarchists, the agitators, the looters, and people who, in many instances, have absolutely no clue what they are doing.Our inventors, scientists, doctors, and researchers have improved the lives of billions and billions all around the world. Our brave astronauts planted the American flag on the Moon, and America will be the first nation to land on Mars.All Americans living today are the heirs of this magnificent legacy. We are the descendants of the most daring and courageous people ever to walk on the face of the Earth. We inherit their towering confidence, unwavering enthusiasm, their unbridled ambition, and their unrelenting optimism. This is the untamed spirit that built this glorious nation, and this is the spirit that burns brightly within the soul of every American patriot.That is why we pay tribute to generations of American heroes whose names are etched on our monuments and memorials, and in the pages of history, and in the hearts of a very grateful people.We will never allow an angry mob to tear down our statues, erase our history, indoctrinate our children, or trample on our freedoms. We will safeguard our values, traditions, customs, and beliefs. We will teach our children to cherish and adore their country so that they can build its future. Together, we will fight for the American Dream, and we will defend, protect, and preserve American way of life, which began in 1492 when Columbus discovered America.Jobs and companies are coming back to our country like never before. The power of tariffs being imposed on foreign lands that took advantage of the United States for decades and decades have enabled us to make great trade deals where there were none. Tens of billions of dollars are now paid to the United States Treasury by the same countries.But there and then we got hit by the virus that came from China. And we’ve made a lot of progress; our strategy is moving along well. It goes out in one area, and rears back its ugly face in another area. But we’ve learned a lot. We’ve learned how to put out the flame. We’ve made ventilators where there were none by the tens of thousands, to the point that we have far more than we need, and we are now distributing them to many foreign countries, as a gesture of goodwill.Likewise, testing — there were no tests for a new virus, but now we have tested over 40 million people. But by so doing, we show cases, 99 percent of which are totally harmless. Results that no other country will show, because no other country has testing that we have — not in terms of the numbers or in terms of the quality.And now, just like everything else, we have become the manufacturer on record for ventilators, we have the most and finest testing anywhere in the world, and are producing gowns and masks and surgical equipment in our country where heretofore it was almost exclusively made in foreign lands, in particular, China, where, ironically, this virus and others came from. China’s secrecy, deceptions, and cover-up allowed it to spread all over the world — 189 countries — and China must be held fully accountable.With respect to remedies, we are now doing unbelievably well, and are in deep testing on vaccines, treatments, and therapeutics. I want to send our thanks to the scientists and researchers around the country and even around the world who are at the forefront of our historic effort to rapidly develop and deliver life-saving treatments and, ultimately, a vaccine.We are unleashing our nation’s scientific brilliance. And we’ll likely have a therapeutic and/or vaccine solution long before the end of the year.We’re grateful to be joined this evening by Americans battling on the frontlines to kill the virus. I just want to say that America thanks you. Please stand. Please. Thank you very much. Great, brilliant people. These are great and brilliant people. Thank you. And brave people.Our movement is based on lifting all citizens to reach their fullest, God-given potential.Never forget: We are one family and one nation. This rich heritage belongs to every citizen, young and old, first-generation American and tenth-generation American. This heritage belongs to every citizen, young and old — first-generation American — we want to go from first generation to tenth generation; it matters not. We are American. We are from the USA.This great heritage belongs to citizens of every background and of every walk of life. No matter our race, color, religion, or creed, we are one America, and we put America first. We will not allow anyone to divide our citizens by race or background. We will not allow them to foment hate, discord, and distrust. We will hold fast and true to the sacred loyalties that link us all as neighbors, as Americans, and as patriots.In every age, there have always been those who seek to lie about the past in order to gain power in the present. Those that are lying about our history, those who want us to be ashamed of who we are, are not interested in justice or in healing. Their goal is demolition. Our goal is not to destroy the greatest structure on Earth, what we have built: The United States of America. To build a future, where every family is safe, where every child is surrounded by love, where every community has equal opportunity, and every citizen enjoys great and everlasting dignity.Our past is not a burden to be cast away, it isa miraculous foundation that will lift us to the next great summit of human endeavor. The incredible story of American progress is the story of each generation picking up where the last finished — linked by time, by fate, and the eternal bonds of our national affection.Those who would sever those bonds would cut us off from the wisdom, the courage, the love, and the devotion that gave us everything we are today and everything we strive for tomorrow. We cannot let that happen. We will not throw away our heroes. We will honor them, and we will prove worthy of their sacrifice. These are great heroes.Let me also say a word to those in the media who falsely and consistently label their opponents as racists, who condemn patriotic citizens who offer a clear and truthful defense of American unity. That’s what our people are doing. We want a clear and faithful defense of American history and we want unity.When you level these false charges, you not only slander me, you not only slander the American people, but you slander generations of heroes who gave their lives for America. You slander people much braver and much more principled than you. You are slandering the young men who raised the flag at Iwo Jima, and those who perished fighting for freedom in the Civil War. You slander them. You are dishonoring their great legacy and their memory by insisting that they fought for racism and they fought for oppression. They didn’t fight for those things; they fought for the exact opposite. We will not let the legacy of these heroes be tarnished by you.The more you lie, the more you slander, the more you try to demean and divide, the more we will work hard to tell the truth. And we will win. The more you lie and demean and collude, the more credibility you lose. We want to bring the country together, and a free and open media will make this task a very easy one. Our country will be united. After all, what do we want? We want a strong military, great education, housing, low taxes, law and order. We want safety, we want equal justice, we want religious liberty, we want faith and family, and living in a great communities and happy communities and safe communities. And we want great jobs and we want to be respected by the rest of the world; not taken advantage of by the rest of the world, which has gone on for decade after decade. We should all want the same thing. How can it be any different than those things?The more bitter you become, the more we will appeal to love and patriotism, and the more we will rise above your hate to build a better future for every child in our great country.To celebrate America’s majestic inheritance, yesterday I signed an executive order to create a brand-new monument to our most beloved icons. The National Garden of American Heroes will be a vast outdoor park that will feature the statues of the greatest Americans who have ever lived. We will honor extraordinary citizens from every community and from every place and from every part of our nation. Great men and great women, people that we can look up to forever.Families will be able to walk among the statues of titans, and we have already selected the first 30 legacies and 30 legends. And why don’t we start with a man who has been very unfairly treated, who, two years ago, three years ago — especially five or six years ago — people would have said it’s impossible to even attempt to try and disturb his incredible legacy and success: George Washington. Thomas Jefferson. Betsy Ross. Alexander Hamilton. Benjamin Franklin. John Adams. James Madison. Dolly Madison. The great Frederick Douglass. Abraham Lincoln. Harriet Tubman. Harriet Beecher Stowe. Joshua Lawrence Chamberlain. Clara Barton. Daniel Boone. Davy Crockett. Henry Clay. Susan B. Anthony. Booker T. Washington. Orville and Wilbur Wright, who are looking down.And you’re going to see some planes like you have never seen before, because we build them better than anybody in the world. The greatest Air Force, the greatest fighters, the greatest everything. You’re going to be seeing something — I just wonder what Orville and Wilbur would have been thinking if they ever got to see that. But they’re looking. They’re checking it out right now along with us. Amelia Earhart.A great, great athlete no matter where he went; he was the best athlete: Jackie Robinson. George S. Patton — General Patton. He didn’t know how to lose. He didn’t don’t how to lose. General Douglas MacArthur. Audie Murphy. The great Billy Graham. And an incredible man, respected by everybody: Martin Luther King. President Ronald Reagan. Christa McAuliffe, and Antonin Scalia.So those are just a few of the people we’ll be naming, and things are subject to change, but once we make that decision, those great names are going to be up there and they’re never coming down. They have just been an incredible group. And we are going to do this in a very democratic way, frankly. We’re going to take names and suggestions. We’re going to have committees and we’re going to pick the greatest people that this country has ever known. The most respected people. The people that helped us the most. And the people that we can look up to and that our children and grandchildren and great-grandchildren can look up to into the future and they can say, “Isn’t America just a tremendous place?” So, thank you. That will be very exciting.The patriots who built our country were not villains, they were heroes whose courageous deeds improved the Earth beyond measure.The beauty and the glory of our constitutional system is that it gives us the tools to fight injustice, to heal division, and to continue the work of our Founding Fathers by expanding and growing the blessings of America. If you believe in justice, if you believe in freedom, if you believe in peace, then you must cherish the principles of our founding and the text of our Constitution. It is our founding and our Constitution. It is a firm foundation upon which all progress is achieved. That’s why our country is so strong, even despite terrible things that happen over the generations.Here this evening are a number of heroes who risk their own lives to uphold these values and keep our communities and our country safe. We are joined by the outstanding law enforcement officers who have been able to fight on the front lines, protecting our cities — many of them facing down violent assaults from very bad people. We are especially moved to be joined by the family of a great man: Fallen Officer David Dorn, a 38-year veteran of the St. Louis Police Department who was killed last month in the city he devoted his life to defending. And to David’s great family, I want to thank you very much. The American people will always support the courageous men and women of law enforcement. And nobody — nobody — embodies that better than David. Thank you very much. Please. And David is looking down right now, and he is so proud of you and he loves you so much. And thank you for being here. He’s a great man. He’s a great man.Finally tonight, we will salute the greatness and loyalty and valor of the men and women who have defended our independence for 244 years. We will honor the amazing men and women of the United States Military.Never in history has a nation used so much power to advance so much good. Battlefields across the world, and here at home, are marked with the gravestones of young patriots who spent their final valiant moments on this Earth to secure liberty and peace. Every child should be taught the military heroes who fought and died to make us free. These are great, great people. These are great, great heroes, indeed. And our greatest leaders and heroes should be recognized and even immortalized for coming generations to see. You know that. This will make our country even stronger long into the future.In a few moments, we will bear witness to awesome aircraft representing every major military conflict over the last 75 years. These planes once launched off massive aircraft carriers in the fiercest battles of World War II. They raced through the skies of Korea’s MiG Alley. They carried American warriors into the dense fields and jungles of Vietnam. They delivered a swift and swip- — and you know that sweeping — it was swift and it was sweeping like nobody has ever seen anything happen — a victory in Operation Desert Storm. A lot of you were involved in that. A lot of you were involved. That was a quick one. And they have gone on to dangerous missions around the world to take out enemy terrorists and bring our soldiers home safely.As you know, we’ve killed, this last year, the two leading terrorists of the last 10 years: al-Baghdadi and Soleimani. Killed. Gone. Over. We have worked to fully rebuild the Armed Forces of the United States. No enemy on Earth stands a chance — $2.5 trillion, we’ve invested — all made in the USA. We’ve never had anything near the power and the equipment that we have right now. We did that over the last three years.Everywhere these aircraft have flown, they’ve rained down American thunder, delivered American justice, and they have fiercely defended every square inch of American sovereignty.In their steel frames, broad wings, and roaring engines, we see the story of America’s daring defiance, its soaring spirit, and undying resolve.Throughout our history, our country has been tested and tried – but we have always fought to victory. Whenever our way of life has been threatened, our ancestors have responded with the same resounding answer as those first patriots who fought for independence: We are Americans, and we never back down, we never give in, and we never give up, and we will never yield [in] defense of our nation. We love our nation. We will only fight to win.Today, we thank God for the gift of life and for the blessing of liberty.We honor the legends of our history, the glories of our Founding Fathers, and the giants of the past, and the heroes of today who keep us safe, who keep us strong and proud, and who keep us free.Once again, Happy July Fourth to all. Our country is in great shape. Our military has never been stronger. And many, many good things are going to happen. Next year will be one of the greatest years we’ve ever had.I want to thank our men and women — they are so good — of the National Park Service, Air Traffic Control, and the United States Military.God Bless you, God Bless our heroes, God bless America. And now, let the flyovers begin. Thank you very much. Thank you, thank you. So we begin, Oklahoma, we begin. Thank you, Oklahoma. And thank you to Vice President Mike Pence. We begin, we begin our campaign. Thank you. We begin our campaign and I just want to thank all of you, you are warriors. I’ve been watching the fake news for weeks now, and everything is negative. Don’t go, don’t come, don’t do anything. Today it was like, I’ve never seen anything like it. I’ve never seen anything like it. You are warriors, thank you. We had some very bad people outside. We had some very bad people outside, they were doing bad things. But I really do, I appreciate it. We have just a tremendous group of people in Oklahoma. And I hear, I hear from your two great Senators and your governor that we’re doing very well in Oklahoma, that’s the word. That’s the word.I stand before you today to declare the silent majority is stronger than ever before. Five months from now, we’re going to defeat sleepy Joe Biden. Boy, does he get a pass from these people, huh? We’re going to stop the radical left. We’re going to build a future of safety and opportunity for Americans of every race, color, religion, and creed. Republicans are the party of liberty, equality, and justice for all. We are the party of Abraham Lincoln, and we are the party of law and order. Think of what we’ve done. We will have close to 300 federal judges appointed and approved by the end of my first time, that’s an all-time record. That’s an all-time record. I’ve always heard how important judges are. Now we know how important they are. Think of that over 300, around 300, by the end of the term. And when we have another four years, we’re going to have a big, big percentage of the total number. Very important, November 3rd.And two great Supreme Court judges. So we have two justices of the Supreme Court, Justice Gorsuch, Justice Kavanaugh, they’re great. They are, they’re great. We have two. And we could get a few more, yeah, we can get a few more. We’ve spent over $2 trillion to completely rebuild the unmatched strength and power of the United States Military. And all of that incredible equipment, whether it’s submarines or missiles or rockets or jet fighters, bombers, it’s all built in the USA. We passed V.A. Choice. Thank you very much, Jim. Where’s my Senator? Jim Inhofe, you better vote for him, he’s running, he’s great.But we’ll get to him and James Lankford in a second, two great Senators. You have two great senators. So we passed V.A. Choice. So if you’re a veteran, for years and years, they’ve wanted to do it for almost 50 years, we got it done. We get a lot of things done. And so if you’re a veteran and you have to wait on line for one week, two weeks, three weeks, five weeks, seven weeks, two months. What happens is you go outside, you get a private doctor, you get fixed up and they pay your bill. We take care of the bill. We take care of the bill and you get immediate service. It’s never happened before. And our approval rating at the V.A. is now 91%, that’s how good it is. Never been anywhere near that number. Never been anywhere near that number.And V.A. accountability, we had a lot of bad people in the V.A. People that didn’t love our vets, people that were sadistic, people that stole, a lot of bad people. You couldn’t get rid of them because they were, let’s say it could be unions, it could be civil service, right, let’s say, let’s just say. And so you couldn’t get it done. That was another one for decades and decades, they wanted to get it changed. And I got it done with those people and your Congressman, your Congressman who I’m going to introduce. V.A. accountability, and now somebody treats our veterans badly and we look at them and what do we say? We say, you’re fired, get out, right? Get out.They got rid of a lot of bad people that were there for a long time. Sort of like me in Washington, draining the swamp. I never knew it was so deep. But it’s happening. It’s happening, I never knew it was so deep. It’s deep and thick and a lot of bad characters. Thank you. We’re lowering the price of prescription drugs, making our allies pay their fair share. They get a big bargain on drug prices and enacting fair trade deals. That finally, finally, after all these years put America first. I’ve been saying it for a long time.We passed the largest tax cuts in the history of our country. The Democrats want to raise your taxes. Tell me about that. Tell me about that. I guess I’m old fashioned. All my life, all my life, I heard politicians want to lower taxes, not raise them. If you could lower him, you couldn’t lose. The Democrats want to substantially raise your taxes. How do you figure that? How do you figure that? And regulation cuts, we passed more regulation cuts than any administration in the history of our country. And with the help of our great energy workers, many of them come from the great state of Oklahoma.Do you ever notice that Biden, no, do you ever notice that Biden oftentimes gets the state wrong? He’s in Iowa and he says it’s good to be in Idaho. No, no, you’re in Iowa. He’s in New Hampshire and he says it’s great to be in Ohio. No, no, no, you’re in New Hampshire. That happens to him all the time, hasn’t happened to me yet. When that happens, there’s nothing you can do to make up for it. You might as well just walk off the stage because the speech is a disaster. Right, right. But we just turned the United States into the dominant energy superpower of the world, of the world. And because of the Chinese virus, what happened about three months ago, it looked like we were in big trouble and we were, and I got it back together. I called Russia. Right, I called Russia.I called Saudi Arabia and believe it or not, I called Mexico. Mexico was a little bit tough. That’s called OPEC Plus, did you ever hear of OPEC Plus. That’s OPEC Plus plus. And we got them to do the right thing and we have our energy back to almost $40 a barrel, meaning you have an energy business again. Almost $40 a barrel. Couple of months ago, it was zero and we were going to lose 10 million energy jobs, 10 million jobs. So Texas and Oklahoma and North Dakota, and many other states would have been hurt. Now you think you’re going to be hurt there. You try putting AOC in judge of your energy. That will make the pandemic look like child’s play to the people in energy. She has one problem, it’s called petroleum. No president or administration has done more in the first three and a half years than the Trump administration. Not even close. Nobody.Our incredible success in rebuilding America stands in stark contrast to the extremism and destruction and violence of the radical left. We just saw it outside. We just saw it outside, you saw these thugs that came along. These people, call them protesters, isn’t it beautiful, it’s so beautiful. No, they’re so wonderful. They call them the Boston Tea Party. They’re so wonderful. Yeah, they call them … You ever watch fake news, CNN, you ever watch?How about the CNN anchor, how about the CNN anchor, you know, did a little shave job in the head, which is fine. And he’s standing in front of a building saying, “things are very peaceful here.” And the building is, it looks like the biggest fire I’ve ever seen. The whole town is burning. It’s like the biggest fire. And he said, “Things are very good here, Anderson. I think it’s great. These are wonderful people, Anderson.” Did you ever see that? It looked like the world was coming to an end. And we did something in Minneapolis after watching for three or four days, I called, I said, “You got to get … you can’t protect yourselves.” I got them to take 8,000 National Guardsmen. And in one hour, it all ended, and they rode through the next three weeks with no problem.And we did the same thing in other cities. But how about Seattle? Isn’t that great? So they take over a big chunk of a city called Seattle. I mean, we’re not talking about some little place, we’re talking about Seattle. Have you ever been to Seattle? They took over a big chunk and the governor, who’s radical left, all of these places I talk about are Democrat, you know that, every one of them, every one of them. And I’d have an offer out, I said, “Anytime you want we’ll come in, we’ll straighten it out in one hour or less.” Now I may be wrong, but it’s probably better for us to just watch that disaster.I flew in with some of our great congressmen, who we’re going to introduce it a second. And I said to them, “Congressmen, what do you think? I can straighten it out fast, should we just go in? No, sir. Let it simmer for a little while. Let people see what radical left Democrats will do to our country.” But Americans have watched left wing radicals, burn down buildings, loot businesses, destroy private property, injure hundreds of dedicated police offices. These police officers, they get injured, they don’t complain. They’re incredible. And injure thousands upon thousands of people only to hear the radical fake news say what a beautiful rally it was. And they never talk about COVID. They don’t talk about, when you see 25,000 people walking down Fifth Avenue or walking down a street of a Democrat run city, you never hear them saying, they’re not wearing their mask. You don’t hear their say, as they’re breaking windows and running in. And then when I say the looters, the anarchists, the agitators, they say, “What a terrible thing for our president to say, what a terrible thing.”But you don’t hear them talking about COVID, COVID, to be specific, COVID-19. That name gets further and further away from China, as opposed to calling it the Chinese virus. And despite the fact that we … I have done a phenomenal job with it, I shut down the United States to very heavily infected but all people from China in late January, which is months earlier than other people would have done it, if they would have done it at all. I saved hundreds of thousands of lives. We don’t ever get even a mention. Then I closed it down to Europe early, closed it down because I saw what was happening. And by the way, most people said, don’t do it, don’t do it. We saved hundreds of thousands of lives and all we do is get hit on like we’re terrible. And what we’ve done with the ventilators and with the medical equipment. And with testing, you know, testing is a double-edged sword. We’ve tested now 25 million people. It’s probably 20 million people more than anybody else. Germany’s done a lot. South Korea has done a lot.They called me, they said, the job you’re doing … Here’s the bad part. When you do testing to that extent, you’re going to find more people, you’re going to find more cases. So I said to my people slow the testing down, please. They test and they test. We had tests and people don’t know what’s going on. We got tests, we got another one over here. The young man’s 10-years-old. He’s got the sniffles. He’ll recover in about 15 minutes. That’s a case, add him to it. That’s okay. That’s a case. I was actually with a very nice man, very good man, even though he’s very liberal, the Governor of New Jersey, right? We know him? Now listen, he said to me, something that’s amazing. New Jersey was very heavily hit, very hard hit, thousands of people. He said with thousands of people that died, thousands of people, there was only one person that died under the age of 18. Would you believe that? Which tells me one thing, that kids are much stronger than us.When you see a little kid running around say, “Boy, oh, boy, do you have a great immune system? How about a piece of your immune system?” They don’t even know about this. Let’s open the schools, please. Open the schools. Open the schools. We got to get them open. In the fall, we got to get them open. The unhinged left-wing mob is trying to vandalize our history, desecrate our monuments, our beautiful monuments. Tear down our statues and punish, cancel and persecute anyone who does not conform to their demands for absolute and total control. We’re not conforming, that’s why we’re here, actually. This cruel campaign of censorship and exclusion violates everything we hold dear as Americans. They want to demolish our heritage so they can impose their new oppressive regime in its place. They want to defund and dissolve our police departments, think of that.And I heard it for the first time two weeks ago, I said, “Well, that one, I mean, they’re only kidding.” I said, “They’re only, they’re not.” Minneapolis, you see what’s going on. They’re not kidding. They got a lot of problems. They’ll have a lot of problems. Hey, it’s 1:00 o’clock in the morning and a very tough, I’ve used the word on occasion, hombre, a very tough hombre is breaking into the window of a young woman whose husband is away as a traveling salesman or whatever he may do. And you call 911 and they say, “I’m sorry, this number’s no longer working.” By the way, you have many cases like that, many, many, many. Whether it’s a young woman, an old woman, a young man or an old man and you’re sleeping. So what are you going to do, right? So they want to defund. They really do, this as a serious movement. And in Minneapolis, the council’s already passed it. In Seattle, you see what’s going on there, it’s even worse, okay. These people are stone cold crazy. They’re crazy.So if you want to save your heritage, you want to say that beautiful heritage of ours, we have a great heritage. We’re a great country. You are so lucky I’m president, that’s all I can tell you.People have come up to me, say, “How do you take it?” I say, “Do I have a choice? Do I have a choice?” We deal with a lot of bad people, but we’re winning. And every once in a while, I’ll have one of these days where I’m hit left and right, left and right, like even this great event. If you could have seen outside or if you could have heard the reports, the reports, “Oh, it’s COVID.” It’s this again. By the way, it’s a disease without question, has more names than any disease in history. I can name, “Kung flu.” I can name, 19 different versions of names. Many call it a virus, which it is. Many call it a flu, what difference? I think we have 19 or 20 versions of the name. But they say to me, “Where do you get the energy?” I say, “I don’t have a choice. I don’t have a choice.” It was interesting, to show you how fake they are, you might’ve seen it. So last week they called me and they say, “Sir, West Point, West Point, we’re ready.” I said, “Oh, that’s right. I have to make the commencement speech at West Point.”You know, they delayed it for six weeks because of COVID. So they delayed it and I went there. 1,106 cadets were graduated and beautiful. Beautiful cadets. Just to show you how bad the fake news is, so they say to me, “Sir, we’re ready to go.” I say, “Let’s go.” This is after saying hello to a lot of cadets, inspecting little areas of a building, that was very exciting. Actually, it’s beautiful, very old. Studied a lot of our great generals, some of our presidents that went there. West Point is beautiful, right on the Hudson River. But after an hour, the general that runs it is a fantastic guy. After an hour, we land, we do some more inspections and they say, “Sir, are you ready? Yes, I am.” So we walked like the equivalent of about three blocks, which is fine. We go onstage, which is fine. They make speeches, then I make a speech that lasted a long time. I don’t know, maybe 45 minutes, maybe longer, I don’t know but a long time. The sun is pouring down on me, okay.But they said to me before the speech, “Sir, would you like to salute each cadet, each single cadet? Or maybe there’ll be in groups of two. Would you like to salute? Like this? Yes.” Like this, almost 600 times. You know what that is? 600 times. Thank God they were in twos because let me tell you, you do that 600 times, you go home and you say it’s like a workout without a weight, right? 600 times. So I did that. Then the incredible helicopters, brand new gorgeous helicopters, the Apaches and the other new ones that we just bought.Helicopters, the Apaches and the other new ones that we just bought. So they fly over and the kids throw the hats in the air, it’s beautiful, it really is. It was a beautiful day and we’re all finished. I was on the stage for hours, hours, sun, I came home, I had a nice tan, meaning I had a nice sunburn. The sun’s gone right like that, but I make this speech. I salute for probably an hour and a half, maybe more, but around that. Watch. If I’m off by two minutes they’ll say, “He exaggerated. It was only an hour and 25 minutes. He exaggerated, he lied, he lied, he’s a liar.” These people are sick, the fake news.So then I finish saluting my final salute, I said, “Thank goodness. Thank you very much.” Think of it. So essentially almost 600 times. Now the general says, “Sir, are you ready?” I said, “I’m ready General, where are we going now?” You have to understand I left early in the morning to get there. Now it’s sort of late in the afternoon. A lot of these fakers were with us. So they know. He said, “Sir, we can now leave the stage.” I said, “Great general, let’s go, I’ll follow you,” and he goes like this, “Right here, sir,” and I walked off. The stage was higher than this one and the ramp was probably 10 yards long. I say, “General.” Now you got to understand, I have the whole corps of cadets looking at me and I want them to love their president, I did this big thing. I love them, I love them. They’re incredible, and they do. I said, “General, I’ve got myself a problem, general.” Because I’m wearing leather bottom shoes which is good if you’re walking on flat surfaces. It’s not good for ramps and if I fall down, look at all those press back there, look at them. This was a steel ramp, you all saw it because everybody saw it. This was a steel ramp. It had no handrail, it was like an ice skating rink, and I said, “General, I have a problem,” and he didn’t understand that at first. I said, “There’s no way.” He understood, I just saluted almost 600 times. I just made a big speech. I sat for other speeches. I’m being baked. I’m being baked like a cake. I said, “General, there’s no way I can make it down that ramp without falling on my ass, General. I have no railing.”It’s true. So I said, “Is there like something else around?” “Sir, the ramp is ready to go.” “Grab me sir, grab me.” I didn’t really want to grab him. You know why? Because I said, “That will be a story too.” So now I have a choice. I can stay up there for another couple of hours and wait till I’m rescued or I can go down this really steep, really, really, really … It’s an ice skating rink, it’s brutal. So I said, “General, get ready because I may grab you so fast.” Because I can’t fall with the fake news watching. If I fall, if I fall, I remember when President Ford fell out of the plane, do you remember? I remember when another president, nice man, threw up in Japan, and they did slow motion replays. It’s true, right? “I don’t want that, general.” Now he’s standing there, big strong guy, and he’s got these shoes but they’re loaded with rubber on the bottom because I looked, the first thing I did, I looked at his shoes. Then I looked at mine. Very, very slippery. So I end up saying, “Okay, general, let’s go. I will only grab you if I need you. That’s not a good story. Falling would be a disaster. It turned out to be worse than anything, I would have been better off if I fell and slid down the damn ramp. Right? So what happens is I start the journey, inch by inch, right? I was really bent over too. I didn’t like that. I didn’t like this picture. This picture I’m sure will be an ad by the fakers. So I was bent over, right? Bent over like this. Then we finally reached almost the end and the fake news, the most dishonest human beings, they cut it off. You know why? Because when I was 10 feet short, I said, “General, I’m sorry,” and I ran down the rest, right? I looked very handsome. That was the only good. I wouldn’t want to run down the whole thing because the fall there would be definitely bad. So I took these little steps, I ran down the last 10, and by the way their tape, take a look. In almost every instance, it ends just before I run, and they said, “Here was the number one trending story.”I call my wife, I said, “How good was that speech? I thought it was a …” Hey look, I will tell you when I make good ones and bad ones. Like so far tonight, I’m average, but we’re having fun, we’re having fun. So far tonight, but I call my wife and I said, “How good was it, darling?” She said, “You’re trending number one.” I said to our great first lady, I said, “Let me ask you a question. Was it that good of a speech that I’m trending number one? Because I felt it was really good.” No, no, they don’t even mention the speech. They mention the fact that you may have Parkinson’s disease. It’s true. It’s true. It’s true.They say there is something wrong with our president. I’ll let you know if there’s something wrong, okay? I’ll let you know if there’s something, I’ll tell you what, there’s something wrong with Biden, that I could tell you.So then my wife said, “Well it wasn’t only the ramp. Did you have water?” I said, “Yeah. I was speaking for a long time. I didn’t want to drink it, but I wanted to wet my lips a little bit.” You’re drinking, you’re working hard up there with the sun pouring down on you. I love this location, the sun’s like this. This way they save on lighting, right? That’s why they did it probably. So what happens is I said, “What does it have to do with water?” They said, “You couldn’t lift your hand up to your mouth with water.” I said, “I just saluted 600 times like this, and this was before I saluted, so what’s the problem?” She said, “Well I know what you did. You had on a very good red tie that’s sort of expensive.” It’s silk because they look better. They have a better sheen to them. And I don’t want to get water on the tie, and I don’t want to drink much, so I lift it up, the water.I see we have a little glass of water. Where the hell did this water come from? Where did it come from? I look down at my tie because I’ve done it. I’ve taken water and it spills down onto your tie, doesn’t look good for a long time and frankly, the tie is never the same. So I put it up to my lip and then I say, and they gave me another disease. They gave me another disease. Anyway, that’s a long story, but here’s the story. I have lived with more the ramp than the water but I have lived with the ramp and the water since I left West Point. Not one media group said I made a good speech or I made a great speech, but the kids loved it because they broke their barrier which wasn’t good in terms of COVID but they broke their barrier and they wanted to shake hands, they wanted to … I don’t want to tell anybody, but there were a couple of kids, they put out their hand, I actually shook their hand, okay? I actually shook them. Because they were excited. They were excited. They were with their president. They were excited. The most beautiful young people. Men, women, the most beautiful young people you’ve ever seen. So think of how you feel if you’re me. I go there, how did I do? “Sir, that was a great speech.” You know all my people, “Sir, that was one of your best, that was great.” I said, “That’s great, I agree, it was a good speech. I like that speech.” They don’t mention the speech but they have been going down this ramp at an inch at a time. It’s so unfair. It really is. So unfair. They are among the most dishonest people anywhere on earth. They’re bad people. Bad people.Okay, that’s enough of that. I wanted to tell that story. Does everybody understand that story? The left-wing anarchists tore down a statue of Thomas Jefferson. Now we’re getting into the real stuff. They decapitated a statue of Christopher Columbus, except in New York when the Italians surrounded it. They didn’t have too much of a chance. Those Italians, I love the Italians. They heard they were going to rip down their beautiful Christopher Columbus and all of a sudden they circle that thing. They didn’t do too well in hurting Christopher, did they? Thank you to our Italian population, we’re very proud of you, right? Two days ago, leftist radicals in Portland, Oregon ripped down a statue of George Washington and wrapped it in an American flag and set the American flag on fire. Democrat, all Democrat. Everything I tell you is Democrat and you know we ought to do something, Mr. Senators, we have two great senators, we ought to come up with legislation that if you burn the American flag, you go to jail for one year. One year. Jim and James. Jim and James. We ought to do it.You know they talk about freedom of speech and I’m a big believer in freedom of speech, but that’s desecration, that’s a terrible thing they do. We used to have things, we don’t have them anymore because we want to be so open, so everything, and look what happens? We should have legislation that if somebody wants to burn the American flag and stomp on it or just burn it, they go to jail for one year, okay? In Seattle the Democrat mayor and the Democrat city council have surrendered control of six city blocks to an anarchist … Now these are anarchists, these are not protestors. You listen to the fake news, they say, “Oh, the protesters were lovely.” Could you imagine if people just even slightly to the right tried to take over Seattle? They’d have machine guns out to get them, but these people can take over the city, look at what they’ve done to businesspeople that have spent years and years building their business, and now they’re wiped out. Take it away. Governor Inslee ought to get his act together, get in there, I’ll help you, I’ll do whatever you want. I’m waiting for a call, I would love to do it. I would love to do it, it’ll take less than an hour and it’ll all be over with and you’ll have your city back.Yet Biden remains silent in his basement in the face of this brutal assault on our nation and the values of our nation. Joe Biden has surrendered to his party and to the left-wing mob. He has no control. Does anybody honestly think he controls these radial maniacs? You know what he says to his wife when he’s not confusing her with his sister? “Get me the hell out of there. These people are crazy.” That’s what he says. He has absolutely no control. You know a lot of times I’ll make like a speech and I’ll have this beautiful paragraph come out criticizing every little aspect of the speech, beautiful, brilliant, but Joe didn’t … It’ll say, “A comment from Joe Biden,” but he didn’t say it. Professional people, great students in English lit, people that are very smart say it. Joe Biden said, and they’ll go into this highly complex paragraph, beautifully worded and I say, “Joe didn’t say that. Joe doesn’t even understand it.”If Biden is elected, he will surrender your country to these mobsters 100%. Your 401(k)s, by the way, look at how we’re doing in the stock market. Just set another record with NASDAQ. NASDAQ. Your 401(k)s and money itself will be worthless. Your 401(k)s are doing very well unless I don’t want to say … If you were stupid I’d say, “Don’t sell. Don’t sell. It went down.” But we got it back up, and now NASDAQ, think of it. NASDAQ just set a record and I think you’re going to see a lot of records, and next year, if we don’t do anything stupid on November 3, you are going to have the greatest economic year we’ve ever had. That will be next year. If the Democrats gain power, than the rioters will be in charge and no one will be safe and no one will have control. Joe Biden is not the leader of his party. Joe Biden is a helpless puppet of the radical left, and he’s not radical left. I don’t think he knows what he is anymore, but he was never radical left, but he’s controlled by the radical left, and now he’s really controlled. His campaign staff even donated a lot of money to bail out rioters, looters and arsonists who ravaged Minneapolis. They bailed them out, they put up a lot of money to bail them out, the rioters, the looters and they were, they were the arsonists. They’ll say, “Oh, it’s terrible what he says about the people of our nation.” Maybe some of them aren’t even from our nation.The leftists try to do everything they can to stop us. Every hour of every day, including even violence and mayhem, they’ll do anything they can to stop us. Look what happened tonight. Look at what happened tonight. Law enforcement said, “Sir, they can’t be outside. It’s too dangerous.” We had a bunch of maniacs come and sort of attack our city. The mayor and the governor did a great job, but they were very violent people. Our people are not nearly as violent, but if they ever were, it would be a terrible, terrible day for the other side. Because I know our people. I know our people, but we will never submit to their threats and we will never let them destroy our nation. What they did tonight, I saw it on television coming in on Air Force One. One thing about Air Force One, we got plenty of televisions. We have televisions in closets. You open up the closet, got a television. We got a lot of televisions. It’s a great plane. Great everything. By the way, we ordered new ones. No president wanted to do it. They thought it was luxurious so wait a minute, Air Force One is 31 years old. People don’t realize that. So I said, they gave me a charge, very early in my administration like how about the first week? “Sir, would you sign for this plane?” Now it’s actually two planes. “Would you sign for this plane? Air Force One?” I said, “How old is the original or the one we have now?” “Sir, it’s 31, 32 years.” I’d see people coming in from foreign lands that can’t compete with us, rich countries but they can’t compete with the … They have a brand new beautiful 747-800, and I say, “Wait a minute. That country has new and we have a 31-year, so somebody had to do …”So the deal was made and it was made for a lot of money. I think it was $5.7 or $5.6 billion. Now in all fairness, it’s two planes and there’s a lot of stuff in those planes I won’t talk to you about. So I told Boeing, the head of Boeing, they said, “Sir, please, we’d like to get started on the planes,” I said, “I do too, but I’m not paying $5.6 billion, and I’m not paying $4.6 billion.” I said, “It has to have a three on the front of it.” That’s a hell of a lot of money too, but it is a rather complex situation. They said, “No way. No way.” This was before Boeing had problems by the way, but Boeing is coming back. They’re coming back. Greatest company of the world and that’s their big problem. It had a couple of problems that didn’t work out. That was terrible, but the greatest. I think before that, it was the greatest company in the world. It made up a quarter, one quarter of a point, of our GDP. Think how big that is, one company. It was an unbelievable machine and then they made a plane and they did some foolish things and a terrible thing happened and all of a sudden they’ve gone through hell but you know what? They’re coming back, we’re ready to help them if they need it but they’re coming back in the coming and they’re coming. This was the Boeing before that and they were riding high, like I was before this thing came in, but we’re still riding high because you know what? On November 3 we’re going to win. We’re going to win. So they came in and they came in and they said, “No, no, no, we want $5.6 billion, whatever it was.” Whatever it was, if I’m a little bit off they’ll go crazy. Whatever, but it was a lot. $5.6 billion. Nope, got to have a three. Got to have a three, call me up. Nope, cancel the contract. I said, “Cancel the contract. I want it canceled.” I said, “General, can you cancel the contract?” He said, “Yes sir, I’m very proud of it.” “Oh good. Cancel it.” “Okay sir.” “By the way, to cancel it, do you have to pay anything?” “Yes sir. We have a cancellation fee sir.” “How much is it, general?” “$250 million.” I said, “What?” “Sir, we made a good deal. $250 million to kill.” “You mean if we don’t buy the plane we have to hand them $250 million.” That’s not good, right? Look at these two guys, they’re looking.By the way, that’s like a good story compared to some I could tell you, like with aircraft carriers. So they said, “$250 million?” Or I always say this, or around that number, because if I’m off by a little bit, they say, “Oh, he exaggerates.” I look at numbers all day long. That’s what I look at for years now, for my whole life when you think of it. $250 million cancellation fee, sir. He was very proud of himself. What a great … I say, “General. Don’t cancel. Don’t cancel. Just tell them I don’t want the planes. Don’t put anything in writing, don’t put it in writing, general.” “Why sir?” “Because I don’t want to pay 250.” True. You hear that Jim? Jim Inhofe, he’s great. You hear that Jim? You know that story. He does a great job.So here’s what happened, the bottom line. Boeing says, “No way, no way, no way.” The next week they say, “No way we’re doing it.” The next week they said, “How about $5 billion?” I said, “No way. No way.” The next week they said, “$4.8.” I said, “Nope. It’s got to have a 3 at the front of it. Don’t you understand, you dumb son of a bitch? Don’t you understand?” I turned out to be right. Turned out to be right. Nobody gets that. Nope. Got to have a three. Next day, they come back, “$4.5 is our best offer.” “Nope. I’m not doing it. I’m not doing it. Come back when you’re ready.” A month goes by, another month, they never heard about it, they never heard from me, they thought I was serious, I was, and they came back at $4 billion.That’s a lot of money but I save like a billion six or a billion seven. Nobody wants to talk about it. Nobody wants to talk about it. When I get foreign nations to pay us billions and billions of dollars, nobody wants to talk about that. When I take soldiers out of countries because they’re not treating us properly, Germany is an example. I mean I have a German heritage like some of you. I said, “Let’s get it down from $50,000to $25,000because they’re delinquent. For many years they’re delinquent. They haven’t been paying what they’re supposed to be paying. They’re paying 1% instead of 2% and 2% is a very low number,” and they say, “Yes, we think byAnd they say, yes, we think by 2030, maybe 2032, we could get current. I said, “No, Angela, please. Don’t say that Angela. It’s true. You know who I’m talking about. By the way, very nice woman. Very good negotiator. I said, “Angela, that’s a long time,” this was in 2019. She said 2032. I said, “No Angela, that’s not working.” But I said, because now they want to get cared, but I said, “Well, what about the last 25 years? All the money you owe us?” Everybody forgot about that. They forget about all the money that wasn’t paid. I said, “What about the trillion dollars that you really owe?” So we’re negotiating let’s see, but in the meantime, we’re reducing our troops.Remember this, we’re supposed to protect Germany from Russia, but Germany is paying Russia, billions of dollars for energy coming from a brand new pipeline. So they pay the country we’re supposed to protect them from, they pay billions of dollars to that country. We’re supposed to protect them. Excuse me, how does that work? And the great thing is with Jim Inhofe and with James Lankford, likewise, they just said they love you James. When they hear it, they get it. A lot of people don’t get it. They get it. We cannot continue to be ripped off. We’re ripped off by so many countries and we’re stopping it. And that means that a lot of people don’t want me here. They don’t want me. There are a lot of people that don’t want me. They don’t sell a lot of bombs when we’re not dropping bombs on people. You know that, right? It’s called the military industrial complex.When rioting and looting broke out in our nation’s Capitol, I very quickly deployed the National Guard. I said, “Get them in.” After watching for an evening or two, we stopped the violence and restored peace and order to the streets. And last night that had a little breakout. Again, they ripped down a statue that was 110 years old, beautiful piece of art in front of the police precinct with our radical left mayor watching on television. We’re not happy. That’s going to be very expensive for DC. They’re always looking for money. “We need more money. We always need more money.” And then they don’t do the proper job. So it’s not going to be good for Mayor Bowser, Mayor Bowser there.They were heading over to the Jefferson Memorial recently and they wanted to do damage to our great, beautiful Jefferson Memorial. Not going to happen. Don’t worry about it. We have it surrounded with very strong people. The choice in 2020 is very simple. Do you want to bow before the left wing mob? Or do you want to stand up tall and proud as Americans. And explain this to the NFL. I like the NFL. I like Roger Goodell, but I didn’t like what he said a week ago. I said, “Where did that come from in the middle of the summer? Nobody’s even asking?” We will never kneel to our national anthem or our great American flag. We will stand proud and we will stand tall. I thought we won that battle with the NFL. The stadiums were emptying out. Did you see those stadiums? It took them a long time to get you back. A lot of people didn’t like that. A lot of people that you wouldn’t even think would care that much. I’ve had people that I said, “These are super left liberals and they didn’t like it.”Joe Biden and the Democrats want to prosecute Americans for going to church, but not for burning a church. They believe you can riot, vandalize and destroy, but you cannot attend a peaceful pro-America rally. They want to punish your thought, but not their violent crimes. They want to abolish bail, abolish and open up your borders. They want open borders, let everyone, and by the way, we’re doing so well. We have a record this month on the borders. Nobody’s coming in. Very few people. And they want to abolish ICE, our great people from ICE who send the roughest toughest, meanest people that you’ve ever seen or ever heard.Generally speaking, when they have lots of tattoos on their face, they’re not looking to do you much help. ICE, they’re rough guys. they’re great Americans, but they’ll walk into, they caught them in a pack. They’ll walk into a pack of tough MS-13 gang members. And we shouldn’t say this, it’s not nice. They want us to negotiate. They start swinging. And the other such way, everybody’s swinging, at the end, they carry them back and they throw them into the paddy wagon. They’re great. And these people want to get rid of ICE. They get rid of murderers. They get rid of rapists. They get rid of the worst scum on earth.And when I called them animals, I said, “They’re animals.” And Nancy Pelosi, they cut up a young woman. They cut up a young woman and her friend, cut them up with a knife because it was more painful. Dead. Cut them up with a knife because it’s more painful. It takes longer than shooting a gun. They cut them up. I said, “These are animals.” And Nancy Pelosi said, “These are human beings. They’re not animals.” If I lose an election over that, you know what? This country is in big trouble. They want to disarm law, abiding citizens and dismantle our police forces while freeing vicious MS-13 gang members. In Joe Biden’s America, rioters, looters, and criminal aliens have more rights than law abiding citizens. And that’s true. In my administration, we defend American citizens and we deport MS-13 members or put them in jail if we have to. The chaos you’re seeing in our democratic run cities, these are all run by the Democrats, is what will happen in every city and community and America, and much, much worse if we don’t keep them out.We have to do this. We have to go to the polls on November 3rd and the rest of you know what to do. You know what to do. Got to keep the White House. Joe Biden’s record can be summed up as four decades of betrayal, calamity, and failure. He never did anything. He was a Senator. He was a Vice President. He was before that something. You know what’s great? President. Trump was tough on this or he was tough. They complained, never did anything about it. He’s been there for 43 years or 47 years. He never did anything about it. Biden’s supported every globalist attack on the American worker let’s make every country of the world rich but ourselves, including NAFTA, the disaster of NAFTA. He wanted to go and TPP would have ruined our automobile industry.Korea, I renegotiated the deal. I took a horrible deal. That was a Hillary Clinton special. That was a Hillary Clinton special. She said, “We have to make this deal with South Korea. It’s going to mean 250,000 jobs.” And she was right for South Korea, 250,000. And China’s entry into the World Trade Organization was supported by sleepy Joe Biden. That was one of the worst deals economically in the history of our country. When China joined the World Trade Organization, they were flat line for decades. They became like a rocket ship. He voted for the war in Iraq. He voted for mass amnesty for illegal aliens. He supports sanctuary cities and now Biden wants to end immigration enforcement and he wants to require you to provide free healthcare for millions and millions of illegal aliens.When I took early and decisive action to ban travel from China and protect Americans from the virus. And as I said, Joe Biden, opposed my decision and called it hysteria, xenophobia. He doesn’t know what the word means, xenophobia and fear-mongering. And then he apologized a month later. He said he was wrong, but he didn’t say it. And they didn’t cover it. They didn’t cover it. On one of the single most important policy decisions of our lifetime, Joe Biden sided with China over America, that’s closing the border. He thought it was a terrible thing. Remember, this was in January. That’s early, real, early, the end of January. He thought it was a terrible thing. When we close the border. Too many people that were badly infected with COVID.When the chips are down, Biden will always cave to the radical left. He’ll always bow to the angry mob and he will never protect you or your family and you know that. Joe Biden will always let you down. That’s been his history. At my direction early this year, the heroes of the U.S. military took out the world’s top terrorist, the savage killer leader of ISIS al-Baghdadi and the number one terrorist, anywhere in the world, Qasem Soleimani. We took them out. Joe Biden opposed killing Soleimani. He was vehemently… We killed this number one, terrorist. He didn’t like it. You know why he didn’t like it? Because he thought it would be good politically, that didn’t work out too well. Just as he opposed the raid that killed Osama bin Laden. He opposed it, you know that. Biden is always on the wrong side of history, as said by people that are with him and worked with him. He never made a correct foreign policy decision. Biden is a puppet for China. Son walked out with 1.5 billion. I think it’s a little bit…Allowing them to rip off America for many years. Now they’re paying us billions and billions of dollars. We give a lot of it to our farmers. We have plenty leftover. China is not exactly happy with me. They pay us billions and billions of dollars. And they targeted our great farmers. And I took the money that they targeted, I took that money and I gave it to the farmers. So they were even so they’re okay. Are you okay? Come, Doctor, please. Doctor. Thank you. These people some of the people are waiting for five days, especially in this location. You take your time, darling, take your time.Thank you very much. Take your time. Doctor, thank you, doctor. Some people wait for four or five days. That’s incredible. He never did anything against China, Joe Biden. And that’s why they desperately want him to win. They want him to win so badly. Iran wants him to win so badly. Let me tell you, I’m going to make a very fast deal. The best deal you’ve ever seen. I’ve already made one with China, but I can make even more. They want me to lose because they will own the United States if I lose. Iran. President Obama gave them $150 billion for nothing.And almost more incredible, he gave him 1.8 billion in green cash. Beautiful cash. And now they’re not doing so well, are they? They’re not doing so well. Someday, we’re going to get credit for this, someday, but they are waiting. Iran wants to make a deal so badly. But they’re told by Kerry and all these other, they shouldn’t the Logan Act, but they’re told Kerry and all these people, “Wait, because if Trump loses, you’ll own America, you’re going to own it.” They’ll say you own it. So I don’t mind. I told them we can wait, but when I win, you’re going to pay a much higher price than if you made a deal now, it’s true.I told them. And look what happened to Biden in Ukraine where his son’s paid $83,000 a month. And he was jobless. Give me a break. $83,000 a month. More than anybody. If Joe Biden were to become president an emboldened left, will launch a full-scale assault on American life. You know that. They’ll expel anyone who disagrees with them. Look what happens when you disagree. You use a term that’s perfect and they’re not happy with it. They call you a racist. They call you a horrible person. They want to crush religious liberty. They don’t want religion. Silence religious believers, indoctrinate your children with hateful and vicious lies about our country, subsidize late term abortion and after birth execution.They want to take away your guns through the repeal of your Second Amendment, as sure as you’re sitting there. In fact, he even put the big gun grabber, Beto O’Rourke, who made a fool out of himself when he ran for president. They put him in charge of guns. Lots of luck on your Second Amendment. Just remember I said, and hopefully you won’t have to think back about it too much, because it won’t matter. Hopefully it won’t matter. No, Beto O’Rourke who wants to give up guns is in charge of the second amendment. The Dems will also eliminate private health insurance, ban fracking, that’s not good, and American energy will be in a position of weakness like it’s never been before. And that’s after we built the greatest energy country anywhere in the world by far.And they want to appoint Supreme Court justices who will utterly obliterate your Constitution. And you now see how important the Supreme Court is. Think if we didn’t have two justices, that I think have been very, very, very good, but think how important it is. Think how important it is. And we still, I guess it’s a, I don’t know if it’s an equal court, it’s almost like we’re a minority court, right? It’s almost like we’re a minority court. The recent Supreme Court cases prove that if Joe Biden is elected, he will stack the court with extremists, the forgotten men and women, together with everyone else. We’ll lose everything. The forgotten men and women, I campaigned on the forgotten. These are great people. These are substantial people. These are the elite. By the way, you’re the elite. They’re not the elite. You’re the elite.Somebody two days ago said, “Sir, the elite are really working hard on trying to destroy you.” I said, “Yeah, why do you call them the elite,” I said, “why?” “Well, they’re not elite.” I look better than them. Much more handsome. Got better hair than they do. I got nicer properties. I got nicer houses. I got nicer apartments. I got nicer everything. I ran for politics once, just once in my life. And I became President of the United States. And hopefully if you get out and vote, we’ll do it one more time. We won’t even toy with them about three or four more times. We won’t. We’ll do it one more time. We’ll be two for two. And our country will never, ever be stronger.But I’ll be soon announcing a new list of exceptional candidates for the United States Supreme Court. And I’ll choose only from that list. A hundred percent, probably 25 incredible people, any one of which could be a great justice, any one of which. And I did it last time and people loved when I did it. And I’ll only pick from that list. Biden can’t release his list because the names would be too extreme, too radical. They wouldn’t be acceptable, but they will be very radical people. People don’t understand, but we actually won on DACA yesterday. We actually won because they basically said, “You won, but you have to come back and redo it.” It’s almost like, “Gee, come on back, your paperwork was no good.” But we’re going to be refiling, but don’t let it get you. Everything’s going to work out really good. Everything’s going to work out good.It was a great, it was great. I mean, would have been nice if we won. And Everybody said, “Oh, you’re going to win DACA. You’re going to win DACA. That’s easy. You got to win DACA. That’s easy.” They all said it. And they came back and they said, “We don’t like what you did with your paperwork,” essentially. So we’re re-filing it. Most people would say we lost. We didn’t lose. We’re going to refile it. And everything is going to work out for the young people. Most of whom aren’t so young anymore, by the way. But we’re going to work it out for everybody.Biden is fully controlled by the fringe of his party. He is their pawn. He doesn’t even know where the hell he is. Let’s face it. He installed socialist Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez to be in charge of his environmental policy and his energy. Energy, you can forget petroleum. How does Oklahoma feel about being petroleum free? Not good, right? Our country will have no energy. Our country will have nothing. Oklahoma, Texas, North Dakota, and many others will all be out of business. I don’t think that’s going to work out too well, but she’s actually in charge of environmental policy. And you know what that means. She doesn’t even want to win. She doesn’t want those bird killing machines that go round and round. You want to see a lot of birds that are dead? Go under a windmill sometime. She wants us to go back to the stone ages because she’s got no sense, no credentials. She’s got a little charisma, not much, but she doesn’t have a clue. You know it. But she’s in charge of the environment. No airplanes. We can forget Boeing, I guess, come to think of it. We talked about Boeing. We could forget Boeing. Let’s cancel those brand new Air Force Ones.Likewise, Representative Ilhan Omar is going to be very much involved in a Biden government. They will put this hate-filled, America-bashing socialist, front and center in deciding the fate of your family and deciding the fate of your country. I don’t think she would like to make the government of our country just like the country from where she came, Somalia. No government, no safety, no police, no nothing. Just anarchy. And now she’s telling us how to run our country. No thank you. And I think we’re going to have a big victory in the state of Minnesota, because they’ve had it. They’ve had it.Biden is a very willing Trojan horse for socialism. When Biden first ran for president over 33 years ago, remember I used to call him 1% Joe, he never got more than 1% until Obama took him off the trash heap. But he blatantly copied the speech of a British politician, even ripping off the man’s personal biography and family history and claiming it was his own. He forgot to say he was born in America. Joe Biden is a shameless hypocrite. Since 2003, he has delivered fawning eulogies to the funeral. And at those funerals of three leading supporters of segregation, including a former member of the KKK, and yet Biden is now smearing as racist, tens of millions of people like yourselves. Decent, hardworking Americans who he’s never met. And he frankly probably doesn’t want to meet. America should not take lectures on racial justice from Joe Biden. Sleepy Joe. A man who praised and partnered with segregationists, shift millions of black American jobs overseas, and everyone else’s jobs too by the way. If I didn’t come along, we’re building auto plants, we’re building everything. And there’s never been a comeback like we’re making right now. Never been.He hollowed out our middle class, including our black middle class with open borders. Trapped young children in failing government schools, built cages. Those cages were built by Obama and Biden. Look it up, 2014. And the fake news doesn’t wanted to… Remember the picture of the cage? A cage for children. Remember the picture of the cage. And they said President Trump. And then they realized that was at a newspaper, 2014, the same… Built by Obama and Biden, the cages. And they don’t-And they don’t want to report the way it is. They know the way it is. They’re not stupid. They sent young boys to fight in Iraq while the inner cities crumble, helped the big banks while hammering community leaders, and made our cities less safe and secure for all. They’ve done a terrible job and they shouldn’t be awarded. They should not get rewarded with an election victory on November 3rd, that shouldn’t happen. It’ll destroy this country. Our country will be destroyed. We’ve all worked too hard. They don’t know what the hell they’re doing. Some do actually, but in a very sinister way. Virtually every policy that has hurt black Americans for half a century, Joe Biden has supported or enacted. I’ve done more for the black community in four years than Joe Biden has done in 47 years.Racial justice begins with Joe Biden’s retirement from public life. We are joined tonight by many outstanding Republican leaders. These are great people. We have two of our most distinguished, hardworking, wonderful friends, senators. They do a great job. Senator Jim Inhofe and James Lankford, please stand up. Two very respected, I will tell you, two very respected people in Washington. They’re respected by everybody. They do some job, and I’d have you come up, but you can relax. I will say this. Jim is running on November 3rd, Jim Inhofe. He’s running on November 3rd. I don’t even know. Does he… Hey, James? Does he have any competition? Is somebody actually running against… There’s no competition that he’s got. I know he’s got James’ support. He’s got my support. I give him 100% endorsement. Jim Inhofe. I’d give it to James too, but he’s not running this time. Thank you. Jim, great job. Thank you very much. What a great Senator he is.Also here is a man who’s respected by so many. He’s a little bit right of the people we’ve been talking about tonight. Senator Tom Cotton of the great state of Arkansas. Thank you, Tom. They like you people.Thank you, Tom. Great job you’re doing. We’re glad to be joined as well by a man that I’ve gotten to know. He’s done an incredible job with COVID and with everything else he touches, Governor Kevin Stitt. Thank you both. Thank you both for being here. Thank you. Lieutenant Governor Matt Pinnell. Thanks, Matt. Thanks, Matt. And Representatives Frank Lucas, Tom Cole. He’s been here for a little while. He’s done an incredible job. Markwayne Mullin, you don’t want to fight with him. I want to put him and Jim Jordan in a match together, I want to. Kevin Hern, great job today, Kevin. The great Jim Jordan, Jim Jordan. Elise Stefanik. Lee Zeldin. Tom Emmer. Tom, thank you. These are warriors, folks. These are great warriors. During the fake impeachment trial, I’ll tell you what. There was nobody that could have done the job they’ve done. That includes the Senate and the House. These people are incredible.David Kustoff. David. A great friend of mine. Debbie Lesko, Arizona. Great job, Debbie. Great job. And a man who’s got very good genes, Greg Pence. Thank you all. Great job. They’re great… They are, they’re warriors. I’ll tell you what. Not every person is, but this group is, and we have a lot of them in Washington, and we’ll send Jim Inhofe back, and we’ll send all of them. You’ll send every one of them. They have to come back because they have been fighting for us, and they’ve been fighting for you. And they are just incredible, talented, tough, strong people that love your state a lot. So thank you very much.So we built the greatest single economy in the world. And then we say not only the world, but actually in the history of the world, and they never even challenged me. So I guess I’m right. We did it. We had the best numbers anybody’s ever had. We have the best employment numbers, African American, Hispanic American, Asian American, the best employment numbers in history, the best stock market numbers in history. We were the envy of the world. Everybody would come in to see me, presidents, prime minister, kings, queens, and dictators. Dictators would even come in to say congratulations on the economy. And then the plague came in, and now what we’re doing is we’re doing it again. And it’s going fast. We have to have a lot of it done because people don’t quite get it. We’re doing record business. It’s happening at a level and a speed that nobody can believe.Two weeks ago, job numbers came in the single biggest number in the history of our country. Last week, retail sales numbers came in, retail sales, the single greatest number in the history of our country. So here’s what’s going to happen. Here’s what’s going to happen. They blame a President for anything. When you see looters, even though we put them down, if we didn’t stop them, nobody would because the other side will never stop them. But they always blame a President. Here’s what’s happening. We’re going up. We’re going up. We’re going up. We’re going to go up. Then we’re going to hit October. We’re going to be up. We’re going to be way up. We’re not going to be where we were, but in many ways, other than all of the horrible, horrible death that was so needlessly caused by a virus that should have been stopped where it originated, which was China.But we’re going to go up, up, up, up August, September, October, and people are going to say, “Man, this guy is doing a good job. He knows what he’s doing. I don’t believe the fake news anymore.” And you’re not going to want to lose your 401k’s. And you’re not going to want to lose all of that wealth that you’ve accumulated, whether it’s real estate wealth or any wealth you can think because it’ll all come tumbling down if these people are put in charge. And if they double and triple and quadruple your taxes, it will be a whole different ball game. So I’m not putting any pressure on anybody, but in the end, we’re going to have a phenomenal economy. And next year we’re going to have a good third quarter, but next year, and I said it before, will be the single greatest year economically that we’ve ever had, okay?And if you see that happening, if you see it happening on November 3rd, you don’t have the guts to vote against Trump. You, even you, you don’t have the guts to vote against Trump. Say, “Wait a minute, darling. My 401k is higher than it was the last time. I don’t think I want to take a chance.” You’re not going to want to do that. The stock market has been the best. Think of this, go back one week and go back 50 days. In that 50-day period, it’s the strongest 50 days in the history of the stock market, think of it. And your wife or your husband says, “Darling, I love you so much. You are such a great investor.” And all you did is just keep the same crap you had the first time, right? “Darling, I love you so much. You’ve always been a loser. You’ve always lost money. But now under President Trump, you’re one of the greatest financial minds in our country.” And all you did was keep your stock.Now, if you think you’re going to run against… Oh, they’re going crazy. They want the stock market to go down. Even if it costs them money, they want the stock market to go down even if it costs them money, and they don’t even know why. You know what, they’re smart and they’re vicious, but they don’t know why. I’m telling you, they don’t know why. What’s wrong with having the strongest military brand new in the world [inaudible]? What’s wrong with having these great economic numbers? What’s wrong with having to close it down? We saved millions of lives. You know, a lot of people say we should have gone herd, let’s go herd. Ask them how are they doing in Brazil. He’s a great friend of mine, not good. You heard about Sweden, right? Too much. Ask them how they do it in Sweden. We saved millions of lives, and now it’s time to open up, get back to work, okay? Get back to work.I recently signed groundbreaking criminal justice reform. I secured record and permanent funding for historically black colleges and universities. We slashed regulations and passed massive tax cuts to give black workers a pay raise like they’ve never, ever gotten before and lift up black owned businesses. And I worked closely with a great senator also, friend of theirs, Senator Tim Scott, South Carolina, to create opportunity zones, which are doing incredibly. And since then countless jobs and $100 billion of new investment, not government investment, have poured into 9,000 of our most distressed neighborhoods anywhere in the country. 9,000, never happened before. Tim Scott. Today. I’m also announcing that I have directed Secretary of the Interior David Bernhardt to place the John Hope Franklin Reconciliation Park here in Tulsa on the African American Civil Rights Network. So many of my friends have been asking me to do that. So many of my friends, including these great politicians. So we’re going to do that. It’ll be done very quickly.We will forever remember and honor the courageous people who helped build this state and this country. Democrats are stoking division in order to distract from their decades of failure on schools, jobs, housing, justice, and crime. In major city public schools run by Democrats, over two thirds of students are falling behind in reading and math. And I think the numbers are worse than that. But Democrats would rather deny these children the future they deserve than allow them to attend the charter, public, private, religious, or independent schools of their choice. Pro choice, pro choice, pro choice for schools. It’s very popular, but some people it’s like a disaster because what it does to certain unions that have a lot of power over the Democrats, even though they know it’s wrong.Republicans believe access to education is a civil right. It’s a civil right. 20 of 20 of the most dangerous cities in America are controlled by Democrats. Think of that, 20 of 20. And so is nearly every major city with a child poverty rate that’s over 30%. They’re controlled by Democrats. We can name every one of them. The murder rate in Baltimore and Detroit is higher than El Salvador, Guatemala, or even Afghanistan. How are they doing, the Democrats running those cities? Your whole country will be like that. In 2018 alone, our police arrested nearly 12,000 people for murder and manslaughter, 25,000 people for rape, and nearly 1.5 million for assault, violent assault. The Democrats’ push against our police will drive up crime and drive up costs at levels you’d never believe. Thousands of innocent lives will be lost. As President, I will always support the incredible men and women of law enforcement.A vote for Republicans is a vote for better schools, better jobs, safer families, and stronger communities for all Americans. There is a limit to what we can together achieve with four more years. With your help, we will lift millions of our citizens from welfare to work, dependence to independence, and poverty to prosperity. That’s what’s happening, that’s what’s happening. And that was happening at a level that nobody ever thought they’d see, it was happening before this COVID came in. It was happening at a level that nobody believed possible. And then China sent us the plague, thank you very much. We will protect Medicare and Social Security for our great seniors. And we’ll always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. Always, always. We will appoint more judges to interpret the Constitution as written. We will end deadly sanctuary cities.We will finish the wall, which has now 212 miles built and beautiful, 212 miles. That’s a lot of miles. And let me tell you, you think that was an easy one, that was a tough one. That party was totally unified against building the wall. You know, in the end they gave up, you know what happened? They realized it was a bad issue for them because these open borders. I love when they fight for open borders because anybody that wants an open border coming in from rough areas, there’s something wrong with those people. So did you notice in the end it was like, “Just leave us alone, build your wall, just leave us alone.” I said, “Thank you very much.”And we will elect a Republican Congress to create a fair, safe, sane, and lawful system of immigration that puts American workers first. We will revitalize our cities, and we will build gleaming new roads, bridges, tunnels, and airports all across our land. We will enact new trade deals that result in more products proudly stamped with that beautiful phrase, Made in the USA. It’s so beautiful, so beautiful. Made in the USA. That’s happening too. We have so many plants coming into Michigan and so many other states. We have car plants coming in would have never come if I wasn’t President, would have never come. We will become the world’s premier pharmacy, drug store, and medical manufacturer. That’s already started. We’re bringing it back. We will keep America out of foolish, stupid, ridiculous foreign wars. We will never hesitate to kill America’s terrorist enemies.When I took over, ISIS was all over the place, and I did something that I felt we should do. And we have now obliterated, we have now captured 100% of the ISIS caliphate. 100, 100. And like our depleted military when I took over, like our empty shelves, medically, when I took over, like all of the things that when I took over, it was a mess, we have done a job. You had to see what ISIS was doing. They were getting bigger, bigger, bigger, bigger, bigger. I came in, smaller, smaller, smaller. “Sir, we’ve just taken 100%.”We will launch a new age of American ambition in space. And the United States will be the first nation to land on Mars, good program. You saw the beautiful rocket three weeks ago go up, beautiful.We will defend privacy, free thought, free speech, religious liberty, and the right to keep and bear arms. And when you see those lunatics all over the streets, it’s damn nice to have arms. Damn nice. Interesting how all of a sudden people understand it, right? You couldn’t sell it. Now people understand it. The right to keep and bear arms, we’ll protect your second amendment.Above all, we will never stop fighting for the sacred values that bind us together as one America, we will support, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States. We uphold the principle of equal justice under the law. We believe in the dignity of work and the sanctity of life. We believe that faith and family, not government and bureaucracy are the true American way. We believe that children should be taught to love our country, honor our history, and always salute our great American flag. And we live by the words of our national motto, it will never change, “In God we trust.” We stand on the shoulders of American heroes who crossed the oceans, blazed the trails, settled the continent, tamed the wilderness, dug out the Panama Canal, laid down the railroads, revolutionized industries. Won two world wars, defeated fascism and communism, and made America the single greatest nation in the history of the world. And we are making it greater and greater every single day. Proud citizens like you helped build this country, and together we are taking back our country. We are returning the power to you, the American people. With your help, your devotion and your drive, we are going to keep on working, we are going to keep on fighting, and we are going to keep on winning, winning, winning.We are one movement, one people, one family, and one glorious nation under God. America will soon be thriving, like never before because, ladies and gentlemen of Oklahoma, the best is yet to come. Together we will make America wealthy again, we will make America strong again, we will make America proud again, we will make America safe again, and we will make America great again. Thank you. Thank you, Oklahoma. Thank you. Thank you, General, and hello cadets. On behalf of our entire nation, let me say congratulations to the incredible West Point Class of 2020. Congratulations. Everyone have a good time, enjoy yourselves, because we are here to celebrate your achievements, and great achievements they are. Let us also recognize your remarkable Superintendent, General Darryl Williams, for his outstanding stewardship. General, thank you very much. Great job. Thank you.Few words in the English language and few places in history have commanded as much awe and admiration as West Point. This premier military academy produces only the best of the best, the strongest of the strong, and the bravest of the brave. West Point is a universal symbol of American gallantry, loyalty, devotion, discipline, and great skill. There is no place on Earth I would rather be than right here with all of you. It’s a great honor.Across this hallowed plain have passed many of the greatest and most fearsome soldiers that ever lived. They were heroes who drove thundering columns of Sherman tanks into the heart of a wicked empire. They were legends who unleashed the fury of American artillery upon our enemies on remote islands and distant shores. They were titans who strode through cannon blast and cavalry charge, and stared down our foes through gray clouds of smoke and shrapnel. They were the Army Rangers who led the way up jagged cliffs, the Airborne soldiers who rained down justice in the dark of night, the infantry whose very sight meant liberation was near, and the mighty forces who sent tyrants, terrorists, and sadistic monsters running scared through the gates of hell. No evil force on Earth can match the noble power and righteous glory of the American warrior.I have no doubt that the young men and women before me today will add your names to this eternal chronicle of American heroes. You will go forth from this place adored by your countrymen, dreaded by your enemies, and respected by all throughout the world. Someday, generations of future West Point cadets will study your legacy. They will know your deeds, they will celebrate your triumphs, and they will proudly follow your example.To the 1,107 who today become the newest officers in the most exceptional Army ever to take the field of battle, I am here to offer America’s salute. Thank you for answering your nation’s call.On this special occasion, we are delighted to be joined by Congressman Steve Womack, Secretary of the Army Ryan McCarthy, Assistant Secretary Casey Wardynski, and Army Chief of Staff General James McConville, an old grad from the class of 1981.Let’s also express our appreciation to General Curtis Buzzard, General Cindy Jebb, and all of the wonderful instructors, coaches, and faculty members who are continuing West Point’s two-century tradition of unrivaled excellence.To all of the parents, grandparents, and family members watching this ceremony from your beautiful home: Even though you could not be here today, we know this day could never have happened without you. Your love and sacrifice have given America these phenomenal men and women. Cadets, please join me in sending your parents and families the heartfelt thanks that they so richly deserved. They’re all watching right now. Please. Thank you very much.The depth and breadth of the U.S. Military’s contributions to our society are an everlasting inspiration to us all. I want to take this opportunity to thank all members of America’s Armed Forces in every branch — active duty, National Guard, and reserve — who stepped forward to help battle the invisible enemy — the new virus that came to our shores from a distant land called China. We will vanquish the virus. We will extinguish this plague.I also want to thank the men and women of our National Guard who respond with precision to so many recent challenges, from hurricanes and natural disasters, to ensuring peace, safety, and the constitutional rule of law on our streets. We thank every citizen who wears a uniform in selfless service to our nation.The members of this class have come from every state in our union. You have come from the farms and the cities, from states big and small, and from every race, religion, color, and creed. But when you entered these grounds, you became part of one team, one family, proudly serving one great American nation. You became brothers and sisters pledging allegiance to the same timeless principles, joined together in a common mission to protect our country, to defend our people, and to carry on the traditions of freedom, equality, and liberty that so many gave their lives to secure. You exemplify the power of shared national purpose to transcend all differences and achieve true unity. Today, you graduate as one class, and you embody one noble creed: Duty, Honor, Country.Every graduate on this field could have gone to virtually any top-ranked university that you wanted. You chose to devote your life to the defense of America. You came to West Point because you know the truth: America is the greatest country in human history, and the United States Military is the greatest force for peace and justice the world has ever known.The survival of America and the endurance of civilization itself depends on the men and women just like each of you. It depends on people who love their country with all their heart and energy and soul. It depends on citizens who build, sustain, nurture, and defend institutions like this one; that is how societies are made and how progress is advanced. What has historically made America unique is the durability of its institutions against the passions and prejudices of the moment. When times are turbulent, when the road is rough, what matters most is that which is permanent, timeless, enduring, and eternal.It was on this soil that American patriots held the most vital fortress in our war for independence. It was this school that gave us the men who fought and won a bloody war to extinguish the evil of slavery within one lifetime of our founding. It was the graduates of West Point — towering figures like McArthur, Patton, Eisenhower, and Bradley — who led America to victory over the sinister Nazis and imperial fascists 75 years ago. It was under the leadership of West Point graduates like the legendary General Matthew Ridgway that the Army was at the forefront of ending the terrible injustice of segregation. It was Army strength that held the line against the brutal opposition and oppression from Communism. And it has been thanks to patriots like you that America has climbed to new heights of human achievement and national endeavor.This is your history. This is the legacy that each of you inherits. It is the legacy purchased with American blood at the crest of Little Round Top, on the crimson beaches of Normandy, in the freezing mud of Bastogne, and the dense jungles of Vietnam. It is the legacy of courageous, selfless, faithful patriots who fought for every inch of dirt with every ounce of strength and every last scrap of heart and drive and grit they had.And they did it because they believed in the undying principles of our founding. They did it because they cherished their homes, their faith, their family, and their flag. And they did it because when they came to this school, they were taught to hold fast to their love of our country; to cherish our heritage, learn from it, and build upon it. That is what young Americans are taught here at West Point. That is the legacy that you carry forward as second lieutenants in the United States Army, and you must never forget it.Through four long years, you have honed your skills, trained your mind and body, overcome every obstacle, and earned your place of pride in the Long Gray Line. You made it through the rigors of R-Day and Beast, the intensity of CLDT, and weeks of training in the blistering heat. You have pushed yourselves far beyond every limit imaginable.Some of you have even pushed the limits a bit too much. So for any cadets who have not finished walking off their hours, as Commander-in-Chief, I hereby absolve all cadets on restriction for minor conduct offenses, and that is effective immediately. Congratulations. (Applause.) That’s a nice one, isn’t it? Don’t you feel better now? (Laughter.)Surviving the 47-month experience is never easy, but only the class of 2020 can say it survived 48 months. And when it comes to bragging rights, no one can boast louder than the class that brought Navy’s 14-year football winning streak to a screeching halt. You did that. I happened to be there.I happened to be there. That’s right. That was a big day. I was there. You beat Navy and brought the Commander-in-Chief’s Trophy back to West Point for two straight years. So we say, “Go, Army, go.”This graduating class secured more than 1,000 victories for the Black Knights, including three bowl victories, 13 NCAA team appearances, and a Women’s Rugby Championship with the help of somebody that I just met: 2019 MVP, Sam Sullivan. Fantastic job. Thank you. A fantastic job.Five cadets won national boxing championships, and Adaya Queen brought home two. Brendan Brown earned the title of Powerlifting National Champion.In academics, 38 cadets have earned fellowships to continue their studies, including First Captain Dane Van de Wall, who received one of the most prestigious awards in academia: the Rhodes Scholarship. Congratulations, Dane. It’s a great achievement. Thank you. Congratulations. (Applause.) Great achievement.But no one modeled the values of the soldier-scholar quite like Lindy Mooradian. Lindy earned both the highest overall class standing and the highest physical program score. She has published scientific research in a prominent journal and set five new records on the athletic track. Lindy, incredible job. Where is Lindy? Where is Lindy? For somebody that did so well, they didn’t give you a very good seat, Lindy.We have to talk about that. Congratulations.Right now, America needs a class of cadets that lives by your motto: “With Vision, We Lead.” We need you to carry on the spirit of the great General Ulysses S. Grant. Soon after assuming overall command, following three years of Union setbacks, General Grant encountered someone heading north to Washington during the Battle of the Wilderness: “If you see the President,” Grant said, “tell him from me that whatever happens, there will [never] be no turning back.”We need you to be as visionary as Patton, who as a young man in 1917, became the first soldier assigned to the Army Tank Corps. One month into the job, he saw the future, writing, “If resistance is broken, and the line pierced, the tank must and will assume the role of pursuit cavalry and ride the enemy to death.” Under Patton’s leadership, that’s exactly what they did.We need you to be as bold and determined as the immortal General Douglas MacArthur, who knew that the American soldier never, ever quits. After leaving the Philippines for Australia at a low point of the Pacific War in 1942, MacArthur famously vowed, “I shall return.” For two years, he then took great strategic risks and placed himself often in personal danger. On October 20th, 1944, McArthur stepped off a landing boat, strode through knee-high water, and proclaimed, “People of the Philippines: I have returned. By the grace of Almighty God, our forces stand again on Philippine soil.” He then called upon the islands’ brave people to rise up and join the fight. America’s momentum was unstoppable.These great leaders were not afraid of what others might say about them. They didn’t care. They knew their duty was to protect their country. They knew the Army exists to preserve the republic and the strong foundations upon which it stands: family, God, country, liberty, and justice. They were true, tough American patriots. That is what our country needs, especially in these times, and that is what you are.Each of you begins your career in the Army at a crucial moment in American history. We are restoring the fundamental principles that the job of the American soldier is not to rebuild foreign nations, but defend — and defend strongly –our nation from foreign enemies. We are ending the era of endless wars. In its place is a renewed, clear-eyed focus on defending America’s vital interests. It is not the duty of U.S. troops to solve ancient conflicts in faraway lands that many people have never even heard of. We are not the policemen of the world.But let our enemies be on notice: If our people are threatened, we will never, ever hesitate to act. And when we fight, from now on, we will fight only to win. As MacArthur said: “In war, there is no substitute for victory.”To ensure you have the very best equipment and technology available, my administration has embarked on a colossal rebuilding of the American Armed Forces, a record like no other. After years of devastating budget cuts and a military that was totally depleted from these endless wars, we have invested over 2 trillion — trillion; that’s with a “T” — dollars in the most powerful fighting force, by far, on the planet Earth. We are building new ships, bombers, jet fighters, and helicopters by the hundreds; new tanks, military satellites, rockets, and missiles; even a hypersonic missile that goes 17 times faster than the fastest missile currently available in the world and can hit a target 1,000 miles away within 14 inches from center point.For the first time in 70 years, we established a new branch of the United States military: the Space Force. It’s a big deal.In recent years, America’s warriors have made clear to all the high cost of threatening the American people. The savage ISIS caliphate has been 100 percent destroyed under the Trump administration, and its barbaric leader, al-Baghdadi, is gone, killed, over. And the world’s number-one terrorist, Qasem Soleimani, is likewise dead.As Commander-in-Chief, I never forget for one instant the immense sacrifices we ask of those who wear this nation’s uniform. Already, you have known the crushing pain of losing a brother in arms. Today, we remember an extraordinary cadet who made the supreme sacrifice in an accident last year: C.J. Morgan. We are deeply moved to be joined by his father, Christopher Morgan. And C.J. was something very special. Christopher is a Secret Service Agent. A tough guy. Great guy. Great son, who is looking down right now. Christopher, I want you to know that we will carry C.J.’s blessed memory in our hearts forever. Thank you very much. Thank you.Tomorrow, America will celebrate a very important anniversary: the 245th birthday of the United States Army. Unrelated, going to be my birthday also.I don’t know if that happened by accident. Did that happen by accident, please? But it’s a great day because of that Army birthday.And as you know, the Army’s first Commander-in-Chief, General George Washington, called the fort that stood on this majestic point “the most important post in America.” Its strategic location on the Hudson River was vital to our war for independence. If British ships gained control of this river, they would have divided our young nation in two. So American soldiers stretched a massive metal chain across the waters of the Hudson, from West Point all the way to Constitution Island. I saw a piece of that chain. It’s incredible. No enemy ship even dared try to cross. Every link in that great chain was formed from over 100 pounds of pure American iron, mined from American soil, and made with American pride. Together, those links formed an unbreakable line of defense.Standing here before you more than two centuries later, it is clearer than ever that General Washington’s words still hold true. West Point is still the indispensable post for America, the vital ground that must not lose. And the survival of our nation still depends on a great chain reaching out from this place — one made not of iron, but of flesh and blood, of memory and spirit, of sheer faith and unyielding courage.Today, each of you becomes another link in that unbroken chain, forged in the crucible known as the United States Military Academy, the greatest on Earth. It has given you soldiers that you can rely on to your right and to your left. And now we are entrusting you with the most noble task any warrior has ever had the privilege to carry out: the task of preserving American liberty.As long as you remain loyal, faithful, and true, then our enemies don’t even stand a chance, our rights will never be stolen, our freedoms will never be trampled, our destiny will never be denied, and the United States of America will never be defeated. With the grace of God and the heroes of West Point, America will always prevail. Nothing will stand in your way, nothing will slow you down, and nothing will stop the West Point Class of 2020 from achieving a true and lasting victory.God bless you. God bless the United States Army. And God bless America. Congratulations. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. My fellow Americans: My first and highest duty as President is to defend our great country and the American people. I swore an oath to uphold the laws of our nation, and that is exactly what I will do.All Americans were rightly sickened and revolted by the brutal death of George Floyd. My administration is fully committed that, for George and his family, justice will be served. He will not have died in vain. But we cannot allow the righteous cries and peaceful protesters to be drowned out by an angry mob. The biggest victims of the rioting are peace-loving citizens in our poorest communities, and as their President, I will fight to keep them safe. I will fight to protect you. I am your President of law and order, and an ally of all peaceful protesters.But in recent days, our nation has been gripped by professional anarchists, violent mobs, arsonists, looters, criminals, rioters, Antifa, and others. A number of state and local governments have failed to take necessary action to safeguard their residence. Innocent people have been savagely beaten, like the young man in Dallas, Texas, who was left dying on the street, or the woman in Upstate New York viciously attacked by dangerous thugs.Small-business owners have seen their dreams utterly destroyed. New York’s Finest have been hit in the face with bricks. Brave nurses, who have battled the virus, are afraid to leave their homes. A police precinct station has been overrun. Here in the nation’s capital, the Lincoln Memorial and the World War Two Memorial have been vandalized. One of our most historic churches was set ablaze. A federal officer in California, an African American enforcement hero, was shot and killed.These are not acts of peaceful protest. These are acts of domestic terror. The destruction of innocent life and the spilling of innocent blood is an offense to humanity and a crime against God.America needs creation, not destruction; cooperation, not contempt; security, not anarchy; healing, not hatred; justice, not chaos. This is our mission, and we will succeed. One hundred percent, we will succeed. Our country always wins.That is why I am taking immediate presidential action to stop the violence and restore security and safety in America. I am mobilizing all available federal resources--civilian and military--to stop the rioting and looting, to end the destruction and arson, and to protect the rights of law-abiding Americans, including your Second Amendment rights. Therefore, the following measures are going into effect immediately:First, we are ending the riots and lawlessness that has spread throughout our country. We will end it now. Today, I have strongly recommended to every governor to deploy the National Guard in sufficient numbers that we dominate the streets. Mayors and governors must establish an overwhelming law enforcement presence until the violence has been quelled.If a city or a state refuses to take the actions that are necessary to defend the life and property of their residents, then I will deploy the United States military and quickly solve the problem for them.I am also taking swift and decisive action to protect our great capital, Washington, D.C. What happened in this city last night was a total disgrace. As we speak, I am dispatching thousands and thousands of heavily armed soldiers, military personnel, and law enforcement officers to stop the rioting, looting, vandalism, assaults, and the wanton destruction of property.We are putting everybody on warning: Our seven o’clock curfew will be strictly enforced. Those who threaten innocent life and property will be arrested, detained, and prosecuted to the fullest extent of the law.I want the organizers of this terror to be on notice that you will face severe criminal penalties and lengthy sentences in jail. This includes Antifa and others who are leading instigators of this violence.One law and order and that is what it is: one law. We have one beautiful law. And once that is restored and fully restored, we will help you, we will help your business, and we will help your family.America is founded upon the rule of law. It is the foundation of our prosperity, our freedom, and our very way of life. But where there is no law, there is no opportunity. Where there is no justice, there is no liberty. Where there is no safety, there is no future.We must never give in to anger or hatred. If malice or violence reigns, then none of us is free.I take these actions today with firm resolve and with a true and passionate love for our country. By far, our greatest days lie ahead.Thank you very much. And now I’m going to pay my respects to a very, very special place. Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Later this evening, we expect the House to pass the Paycheck Protection Program and Health Care Enhancement Act. I’m grateful that Congress is answering my call to deliver these additional $320 billion in relief for the American worker and for small businesses.At a time when many Americans are enduring significant economic challenges, this bill will help small businesses to keep millions of workers on the payroll. You see states are starting to open up now, and it’s very exciting to see. I think it’s very awe-inspiring. We’re coming out of it, and we’re coming out of it well.And we’re—really, I’m very happy the governors have been—the governors, really, have been doing a really good job working with us, and it’s—it’s, really, pretty impressive to see. I’ve spoken to numerous leaders of countries over the last 48 hours, and they are saying we’re leading the way. We’re really leading the way in so many different ways.I’m also very pleased that Harvard—as you know, it’s Harvard and Stanford and Princeton and numerous other universities and colleges, and also large businesses have sent funds back to us. And in some cases, I stopped funds that I looked at. And we are pleased to report that the funds have either not gone out or it’s about $350 million, and they’ve either not gone out or we’ve renegotiated it and they’re not getting them.So—and it’s—in a couple of cases, they’re sending them back and sending them back immediately. So I think it was very nice. I want to thank Harvard in particular. They acted very quickly and decisively. And they agreed, when they heard the facts, that they should not be getting it. So we appreciate it very much from Harvard, Princeton, Stanford, and other institutions.The bill also includes $30 billion to support small lending institutions serving distressed communities, helping countless African American and Hispanic American small businesses.As we continue our battle against the virus, the data and facts on the ground suggest that we’re making great progress. In 23 states, new cases have declined in the peak—week. Forty percent of American counties have also seen a rapid decline in new cases. Forty-six states reported drop in patients showing coronavirus-like symptoms. That’s a big number.To keep America gaining momentum, every citizen needs to maintain the vigilance. And we all understand that very well; we’ve gone over it many, many times. This includes practicing good hygiene, maintaining social distance, and the voluntary use of face covering.A safe and phased reopening of our economy—it’s very exciting, but it does not mean that we are letting down our guard at all, in any way. On the contrary, continued diligence is an essential part of our strategy to get our country back to work, to take our country back. We’re winning this, and we’re going to win it, and we’re going to keep watching. We’re going to watch very closely for the invisible enemy.With each passing day, we’re learning more and more about this enemy. The scientists at DHS have released a report offering a number of insights about how the virus reacts to different temperatures, climates, and surfaces. The findings confirm that the virus survives better in cold or in drier environments and does less well in warmer and more humid environments.I have to say that, very excitingly, we’re going to have somebody up; Bill will be up in just a little while. It was a great report you gave. And he’s going to be talking about how the virus reacts in sunlight. Wait until you hear the numbers. You won’t even believe them.U.S. trials of the COVID-19 have been going on and have been approved in the United States, Germany, UK, and China. That’s big news. And we’re—a lot of trials are going on. We have a lot of great, brilliant minds working on this, both from the standpoint of a vaccine and therapeutics.We must be careful in all conditions, but we will—we will get this done. We’re very close to a vaccine. Unfortunately, we’re not very close to testing because when the testing starts, it takes a period of time. But we’ll get it done.And I want to thank the head of DHS Science and Technology, Bill Bryan, for what he’s going to be doing and what he’s going to be saying and the report that he’s about to give. I think it’s going to be something that nobody has ever heard. It’ll be brand-new information and very important information.My administration continues to leverage the Defense Production Act to dramatically increase the manufacture and delivery of critical medical supplies. We finalized three contracts to produce 39 million more N95 masks in 90 days. And as you know, we’re also using a sterilization process. Some great equipment that will sterilize the masks up to 20 times per mask. So that’s like ordering 20 times more masks. And it’s working very well.We just want the hospitals and the institutions, where it is, to use it. A lot of people don’t use it. They’re so used to getting a new mask, they don’t want to use it. They want to go and immediately get a new one. We’re asking them to use the sterilization process. Every bit as good—up to 20 times. Think of that.In addition to ramping up our domestic assembly lines, we also have airlifted nearly 750 million pieces of personal protective equipment into the United States through our Project Airbridge, which has been an incredible thing to watch. It’s really a military operation.The Vice President is now providing each governor with an exhaustive count[y]-by-county breakdown of the privately distributed personal protection. And this is equipment and things that are incredible. It’s personal protective equipment. It’s incredible, and it’s all brand new and at the highest level. We’re getting only the highest level. And also, we’re looking at essential gear within their states, and it’s being delivered to different states quickly and as we speak.This way, the governor should know exactly what’s being delivered through a private-sector supply chain within their states, as well as through the Project Airbridge. We’re trying to get it immediately from the plane to the state. When we can’t do that, we bring it into our facilities and get it to the governors. And we’re getting them fast, and we’re notifying them very strongly so they know it’s there. Governors can use this information to quickly ensure that they get materials where and when they are needed.Today, I also want to extend my special thanks to our nation’s incredible county emergency management teams who have been working relentlessly for weeks around the clock, end on end, to serve their communities, help distribute critical supplies, and save countless American lives. We salute these heroic officials on the frontlines.As we continue to develop potential therapies, the FDA has recently begun a national effort to expand access to convalescent plasma donated from the blood of those who have recovered from the virus. The blood of these donors contains antibodies that can potentially reduce the severity of the illness in those who are sick—and frankly, those that are very sick. Nearly 3,000 patients are now enrolled in the Expanded Access Program, receiving transfusions nationwide.And I want to thank all of the people that recovered, for what they’ve done. They—as I said yesterday, they raise their hand when they barely can walk, and they’re saying, “I want to donate blood. I want to donate whatever it is that you want, because we want to help people.” It’s really quite incredible.Convalescent plasma will also be used to manufacture a concentrated antibody treatment that does not have to be matched with a particular blood type. This concentrated antibody treatment could be used as a preventative measure to keep healthcare workers and other high-risk populations from contracting the virus in the first place. A very big deal.Clinical trials of these products are slated to begin within weeks, and we can maybe have a fairly quick solution. I urge Americans to get in there and keep doing what you’re doing, because again, we want those people recovering or recovered from coronavirus to contact their local blood and plasma donation center to learn how they can help. And they’ve been so great, and I just appreciate it.My administration has also partnered with leading—and we have really been establishing some great partnerships with leading technology companies and scientific journals to create a database of 52,000 scholarly articles on the virus that can be analyzed by artificial intelligence.Top AI experts are now using this wealth of data to gain insights into potential therapies. And we’re collaborating with tech firms, universities, and our national labs to harness American supercomputers in the search for treatments and vaccines. That search is going on, and it’s being—I think you’ll see in the future—you’ll see it’s very successful. Ultimately, it’ll be a tremendous success. Great progress is being made at a rapid pace—a pace like no other.We have every hope that with the full might and resources of American science and technology, and with the courage and devotion of the American people who have been so incredible, we will end this plague, and together we will restore the full measure of American strength and power and prosperity.Our country is going to do fantastically well. You see what’s going on. There is a pent-up demand in our country to get it back right where it was and maybe even better, and that’s what’s going to happen.So with that, I’d like to ask Mike Pence to come up—Vice President. Say a few words please, Mike.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. President. And good afternoon. Today, the White House Coronavirus Task Force met. And while our hearts are with the families of those who have lost their life to the coronavirus and those who are struggling with serious illness today, our team, led by Dr. Deborah Birx, informs us that the data continues to show promising signs of progress.The New York metro area, New Jersey, Connecticut, Detroit and New Orleans all appear to be past their peak. And we are seeing consistent declines in hospitalization and cases in regions across the country.Our only conclusion is that we’re getting there, America, because the American people have put into practice the President’s guidelines of social distancing because you’ve been listening and adhering to the guidance of state and local officials. We are—we’re making—we’re making meaningful progress. In a very real sense, sparing Americans to be exposed to the coronavirus and, no less extent, saving lives.Our task force actually believes, Mr. President, that if we continue these mitigation efforts in the days ahead—as states implement their policies, including phased reopening—that we’ll preserve those gains. We do believe, by early summer, we could be in a much better place as a nation with much of this coronavirus epidemic behind us.Earlier today, we also had a conference call led by Secretary Ben Carson and leaders from HUD about the President’s announcement yesterday that he is repurposing the White House Opportunity and Revitalization Council to focus on the impact of the coronavirus on minority communities. Secretary Carson will convene the council tomorrow, and we’ll be reporting tomorrow afternoon on their progress.We want to thank the more than 270 leaders of organizations dedicated to housing, homelessness, and improving the lives of people across our urban communities—not only for being with us today, for the way they have partnered with our administration and partnered with state and local officials to put the health of all of their constituencies first.As the President mentioned, we’ll—you’ll receive a report that our task force received formally this week from Bill Bryan of the Science and Technology Directorate at the Department of Homeland Security. He will outline, as the President said, encouraging news about the impact that heat and sunlight have on the coronavirus, which will increase the confidence that we feel about the coming summer.On the subject of testing: At the present moment, we have reports of 4.93 million tests having been performed across America. And encouraging news: As states have been engaging commercial labs at a higher level across the country, yesterday our commercial lab system did more than 100,000 tests in a single day. So we’re beginning to activate all of the capacity.And tomorrow, at the President’s direction, our task force will convene a conference call with all of the nation’s governors to talk about the progress that they are making on testing. And we’re going to hear from governors about the practices that—and methods that they are employing to significantly increase testing following our briefing about capacity in laboratories this past Monday.For instance, Governor Mike DeWine just announced that Ohio’s testing has been greatly expanded after the FDA approved Thermo Fisher’s new extraction reagent, saying, in his words, that the action, quote, “probably doubled, maybe even tripled testing in Ohio virtually overnight.”Governor Tim Walz of Minnesota announced, along with the state’s healthcare system, the Mayo Clinic, and the University of Minnesota, what he described as a breakthrough for rapid, widespread testing—able to test more than 20,000 people using a molecular test per day.Governor Kim Reynolds of Iowa launched the Test Iowa Initiative that will triple testing capacity by partnering with Nomi Health and DOMO. She also worked with the University of Iowa Hospitals to leverage further capacity.And Governor Eric Holcomb and Governor Andy Beshear, of Indiana and Kentucky respectively, both announced additional drive-through testing locations.Our priority has always been to focus first on those impacted by the coronavirus and then on those extraordinary healthcare workers ministering to their needs every day. And I know, Mr. President, how proud you are that our men and women in uniform have come alongside our healthcare workers in communities most impacted, and I know the American people are proud as well.As of today, FEMA reports that 35,000 National Guard have been deployed across the country to aid in our coronavirus response. Governor Kevin Stitt ofOhio[Oklahoma] actually deployed the National Guard to hospitals across the state to evaluate protective equipment and hospital capacity and report it in to state emergency management and FEMA.And Governor Greg Abbott of Texas actually mobilized more than 1,200 National Guard and 45 teams to provide greater access to testing.Along with the National Guard, at the President’s direction today, more than 4,500 active duty military doctors, nurses, and medical assistants have been deployed across the country. Yesterday, 1,013 medical professionals in our military were actually deployed to 19 hospitals in 7 states to support those amazing healthcare workers.And with 4.4 million more Americans filing for unemployment in the past week, I joined the President in welcoming passage in the House today of the Paycheck Protection Program. It’ll support working families. It’ll allow small businesses to keep people on the payroll for a period of two months. But it also, as the President requested, included $75 billion to assist hospitals across the country.And in that spirit, the President and I will continue to urge states across the country: Given the unique burden on hospitals, we are now encouraging states to restart elective surgeries, wherever possible—either statewide or on a county-by-county basis. We recognize the role elective surgeries play in finances for local hospitals and we’ll be working with states to enable that.In that vein, Governor Doug Ducey exec-—issued an executive order not long ago, allowing elective surgeries beginning May 1 for hospitals that meet certain preparedness criteria.And Indiana’s governor, Eric Holcomb, is allowing elective clinical procedures to begin on April 21st.Finally, Mr. President, the task force received today our first report on state reopening plans. At the present moment, 16 states have released formal reopening plans. Thirteen of those were actually released since you unveiled the Opening Up America Guidelines to our governors and to the nation last week.And to your point, Mr. President, states are beginning to make those plans. And we’re encouraged to see so many states embracing the phased approach to reopening their economies that’s contemplated in our Guidelines for Opening Up America Again.For instance, Governor Mike Parson of Missouri announced the “Show Me Strong” Recovery Plan as two initial phases intended to protect the most at-risk.Governor Tom Wolf announced the Plan for Pennsylvania that would begin May 8th—will end a stay-at-home order for just portions of Pennsylvania. But the plan, again, requires regions to have fewer than 50 new positive cases per 100,000 for a period of 14 days, and it also lays out a phased reopening roadmap.Governor Kate Brown of Oregon updated their framework for reopening, doing three phases—again, on a county-by-county basis.And Governor Brad Little of Idaho released “Rebound Idaho” in just the last few days that will consist of four phases and require specific criteria that Idaho and businesses need to meet to begin to reopen.Mr. President, with the—with the Guidelines to Open Up America Again, states are making plans. And at your direction, our task force will continue to work very closely, providing them with the data, providing them with the resources to be able to implement those plans in a safe and responsible way.So, with that, let me just end where I began, and to say thank you to the American people. The progress that we are seeing is a testament to what all of you have done; to our extraordinary healthcare workers; to a partnership between the federal government and to state and local official. And I’m confident it’s also owing to the prayers of millions of Americans each and every day.All of that combined, we’re—we’re slowing the spread. We’re protecting the most vulnerable. We’re saving lives. And every single day, we are one day closer to opening up America again.With that, Mr. President, I’d be pleased to call Bill forward. Bill Bryan leads the Science and Technology Directorate at the Department of Homeland Security and now will make a presentation on their recent study.ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: Thank you, Mr. Vice President. Thank you, Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Bill.ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN:—for this opportunity to do this today.Good afternoon everybody. My name is Bill Bryan and I lead the Science and Technology Directorate at the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Over the last several months, we’ve intensified the Department’s R&amp;D efforts to identify and deliver information that informs our response to COVID-19. S&amp;T is working to identify, develop, deploy, and deploy the tools and information to support our response to this crisis.As part of our efforts, we’re leveraging the unique capabilities of S&amp;T’s National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center to study the biology of the COVID-19 virus. This center is a high-biocontainment laboratory located in Frederick, Maryland. It was established in the early 2000s, in response to the Amerithrax attacks, and where we study, characterize, analyze, and develop countermeasures for biological threats to the homeland. We work closely with the CDC, FDA, HHS, and also our Department of Defense colleagues and many others.Yesterday, I shared the emerging results of our work that we’re doing now with the Coronavirus Task Force. And today, I would like to share certain trends that we believe are important.If I may have the first slide, please. And while that’s coming up, our most striking observation to date is the powerful effect that solar light appears to have on killing the virus—both surfaces and in the air. We’ve seen a similar effect with both temperature and humidity as well, where increasing the temperature and humidity or both is generally less favorable to the virus.So let me illustrate with this first slide. If you look to the right, you’ll see that term “half-life,” with a bunch of timestamps on there.First, let me tell you what a “half-life” is. We don’t measure the virus as far as how long we live on the surface; we have to measure the decay of the virus in terms of its half-life, because we don’t know certain elements. We don’t know how much a person expectorates when he—when he spits—right?—when he sneezes, whatever the case may be. We don’t know how much virus is in there. So it’s—that has a long—a bearing on how long the virus is going to be alive and active. So we measure it in half life because half-life doesn’t change.So if you look at an 18-hour half-life, what you’re basically saying is that every 18 hours, the virus—it’s the life of the virus is cut in half. So if you start with 1,000 particles of the virus, in 18 hours, you’re down to 500. And 18 hours after that, you’re down to 250, and so on and so forth. That’s important, as I explain in the rest of the chart.If you look at the first three lines, when you see the word “surface,” we’re talking about nonporous surfaces: door handles, stainless steel. And if you look at the—as the temperature increases, as the humidity increases, with no sun involved, you can see how drastically the half-life goes down on that virus. So the virus is dying at a much more rapid pace, just from exposure to higher temperatures and just from exposure to humidity.If you look at the fourth line, you inject summer—the sunlight into that. You inject UV rays into that. The same effects on line two—as 70 to 35 degrees with 80 percent humidity on the surface. And look at line four, but now you inject the sun. The half-life goes from six hours to two minutes. That’s how much of an impact UV rays has on the virus.The last two lines are aerosols. What does it do in the air? We have a very unique capability—I was discussing this with the President prior to coming out; he wanted me to convey it to you—on how we do this. I believe we’re the only lab in the country that has this capability.But if you can imagine a Home Depot bucket—a five-gallon Home Depot bucket—we’re able to take a particle—and this was developed and designed by our folks at the NBACC. We’re able to take a particle of a virus and suspend it in the air inside of this drum and hit it with various temperatures, various humidity levels, multiple different kinds of environmental conditions, to include sunlight. And we’re able to measure the decay of that virus while it’s suspended in the air. This is how we do our aerosol testing.We worked with John Hopkin Applied Physics Lab, and we actually developed a larger drum to do actually more testing. And it’s four times the size of that. So this is the capability that we bring to this effort.So, in summary, within the conditions we’ve tested to date, the virus in droplets of saliva survives best in indoors and dry conditions. The virus does not survive as well in droplets of saliva. And that’s important because a lot of testing being done is not necessarily being done, number one, with the COVID-19 virus, and number two, in saliva or respiratory fluids.And thirdly, the virus dies the quickest in the presence of direct sunlight under these conditions. And when you—when you look at that chart, look at the aerosol as you breathe it; you put it in a room, 70 to 75 degrees, 20 percent humidity, low humidity, it lasts—the half-life is about an hour. But you get outside, and it cuts down to a minute and a half. A very significant difference when it gets hit with UV rays.And, Mr. President, while there are many unknown links in the COVID-19 transmission chain, we believe these trends can support practical decision making to lower the risks associated with the virus.If I can have my next slide.And when that—while that comes up, you’ll see a number of some practical applications. For example, increasing the temperature and humidity of potentially contaminated indoor spaces appears to reduce the stability of the virus. And extra care may be warranted for dry environments that do not have exposure to solar light.We’re also testing disinfectants readily available. We’ve tested bleach, we’ve tested isopropyl alcohol on the virus, specifically in saliva or in respiratory fluids. And I can tell you that bleach will kill the virus in five minutes; isopropyl alcohol will kill the virus in 30 seconds, and that’s with no manipulation, no rubbing—just spraying it on and letting it go. You rub it and it goes away even faster. We’re also looking at other disinfectants, specifically looking at the COVID-19 virus in saliva.This is not the end of our work as we continue to characterize this virus and integrate our findings into practical applications to mitigate exposure and transmission. I would like to thank the President and thank the Vice President for their ongoing support and leadership to the department and for their work in addressing this pandemic. I would also like to thank the scientists, not only in S&amp;T and the NBACC, but to the larger scientific and R&amp;D community.Thank you very much.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Bill.Q: Mr. Bryan —THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. So I asked Bill a question that probably some of you are thinking of, if you’re totally into that world, which I find to be very interesting. So, supposing we hit the body with a tremendous—whether it’s ultraviolet or just very powerful light—and I think you said that that hasn’t been checked, but you’re going to test it. And then I said, supposing you brought the light inside the body, which you can do either through the skin or in some other way, and I think you said you’re going to test that too. It sounds interesting.ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: We’ll get to the right folks who could.THE PRESIDENT: Right. And then I see the disinfectant, where it knocks it out in a minute. One minute. And is there a way we can do something like that, by injection inside or almost a cleaning. Because you see it gets in the lungs and it does a tremendous number on the lungs. So it would be interesting to check that. So, that, you’re going to have to use medical doctors with. But it sounds—it sounds interesting to me.So we’ll see. But the whole concept of the light, the way it kills it in one minute, that’s—that’s pretty powerful.Steve, please.Q: You’re saying that the country will be in a better place by early summer. Does that mean you’re going to need to extend the social distancing guidelines until then?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we may, and we may go beyond that. We’re going to have to see where it is. And I think people are going to know. You’re going to know. I’m going to know. I think people are going to know just out of common sense. At some point, we won’t have to do that. But until we feel it’s safe, we’re going to be extending.Q: You said you have 23 cases where new cases—23 states where new cases are on decline. What does that mean about when the country can be safely reopened to a more normal point?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, but it means we’re going to watch those cases very carefully. I think we’ve all gotten very good at it. We’ve gotten good at tracing. We see where the cases are, where they’re going, and we’re going to be watching it. And it’s called “containment.” At a certain point, we’re going to be able to contain.And, you know, when you see this, a lot of people have been talking about summer. Maybe this is one of the reasons. We’ve—I once mentioned that maybe it does go away with heat and light. And people didn’t like that statement very much. The—the fake news didn’t like it at all. And I just threw it out as a suggestion, but it seems like that’s the case, because when it’s on a surface that would last for a long time, when that surface is outside, it goes away very quickly. It dies very quickly with the sun.Yeah, go ahead.Q: You said yesterday that you’re going to look into Senator McConnell’s suggestion for allowing states to declare bankruptcy versus the aid —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, we’ll look into it, and I have been looking into it. I’ve been talking to a lot of the different senators, but I don’t want to talk about it now. That was a very interesting presentation.Go ahead, Jon.Q: Well, I wanted to talk about McConnell’s suggestion that aid to the states amounts to a blue —THE PRESIDENT: I just told you I’m not talking about it now.Q:—to a blue-state (inaudible).THE PRESIDENT: I’ll talk about it later.Q: Okay.THE PRESIDENT: I’d like to talk about something that, right now, is of more interest to people.Q: Could I ask Mr. Bryan a question?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Sure.Q: Thank you. When you started your presentation, you described this as an emerging result. Does this mean your study is conclusive? Is there more work to do?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: We’re continuing with that. For example, on the aerosol side, you notice the figures were 20 percent humidity. We’re looking at higher humidity levels. We would expect that would even have a greater impact on the virus. We’re looking at other types of disinfectants. And—and so we’re—this is a—as a scientific community, we’re continuing to study the virus to understand its characteristics.Q: Mr. Bryan, can you explain why some hotspots we’ve seen in the U.S. are hot and humid, like New Orleans, for example?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: Let me explain—if you look at the coronavirus as a chain with many links, what we’ve done through our study is we’ve identified some of the weak links in that chain, that the virus—the transmission of the virus depends upon. We identified that heat and humidity is a weakness in that chain. We’ve identified that sunlight, solar light, UV rays is a weakness in that chain. That doesn’t take away the other activities—the guidance from the White House, the guidance from the CDC and others on the actions and steps that people need to take to protect themselves.This is just another—another tool in our tool belt, right? Another—another weapon in the fight that we can add to it and, in the summer, we know that summer-like conditions are going to create an environment where the transmission can be decreased. And that’s an opportunity for us to get ahead.Q: But I—just, can I ask about—the President mentioned the idea of cleaners, like bleach and isopropyl alcohol you mentioned. There’s no scenario that that could be injected into a person, is there? I mean —ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: No, I’m here to talk about the findings that we had in the study. We won’t do that within that lab and our lab. So —THE PRESIDENT: It wouldn’t be through injection. We’re talking about through almost a cleaning, sterilization of an area. Maybe it works, maybe it doesn’t work. But it certainly has a big effect if it’s on a stationary object.Q: Mr. Bryant, are we simplifying it too much by saying that it’d be better with the warmer weather and the sun coming out more and more, that people would be outside than staying inside their home, confined to the four walls of their house?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: It would be irresponsible for us to say that we feel that the summer is just going to totally kill the virus and that if it’s a free-for-all and that people ignore those guidelines. That is not the case.We have an opportunity, though, to get ahead with what we know now and factor that into the decision making for what opens and what doesn’t.THE PRESIDENT: But so are you saying, on surfaces, the heat, the hot summer, and whatever other conditions—humidity and lack of humidity—that that would have an impact so that on surfaces, where it can be picked up, it will die fairly quickly in the summer, whereas in the winter, it wouldn’t die so quickly?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: Yes, Mr. President. When it’s exposed to UV rays—take playground equipment, for example: The UV rays hitting a piece of playground equipment will kill the virus when it hits that—when it hits on the playground equipment. But underneath, where the sun does not get, if someone touched that and had it on their hands, it could still be there, right? Because it has to be in direct light of the UV rays.THE PRESIDENT: If it’s on somebody’s hands, right?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: Yes.THE PRESIDENT: And they haven’t touched their face and all of the things that we’ve all been —ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: If it’s exposed to the sun, it’ll —THE PRESIDENT: I know, but if they’re outside—right—and their hands are exposed to the sun, will that kill it as though it were on a piece of metal or something else?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: Not—I don’t want to say it will at the same rate, because it’s a non-porous surface. But what we do know—what we do know is that we looked at the worst-case scenario, and the virus lives longer on non-porous surfaces. So porous surfaces, it doesn’t look quite as long. So, in theory, what you said is correct.THE PRESIDENT: This is sort of semi-non-porous, right? This, right?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: That’s true. Yes, Mr. President.Q: Mr. Bryan, how can the governors —(Cross-talk.)THE PRESIDENT: Wait, wait, wait, wait. Okay, go ahead.Q: One at a time. Mr. Bryan, how should governors who are opening their states, working on that, will incorporate the findings of this study into those guidelines?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: I would leave that up to the governors. This is a —Q: What was your advice?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: This is a decision—this factors into their decision process.As I mentioned, with knowing this knowledge and having this knowledge, as we continue to study and further know what the virus does and how it reacts, it could impact the way a governor will look at when he opens in a state, how he opens it, in what environments these things are opened up. But I leave that up to the governors to make that decision.Q: Obviously, at the moment, the advice is stay at home. By the summer, could we be flipping that and saying you’d be much better off being outside with UV rays or the humidity that Washington brings in August?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: I would not go contrary to the guidance that have been issued right now. I think, though, to tell you that if—if I’m having an event with my family, I’m doing it in the driveway or in the backyard, not inside the house with my children.THE PRESIDENT: In fact, I’m thinking about moving outside to the Rose Garden. (Laughter.) No, it’s a very interesting question, actually.Okay. Please, go ahead. In the back.Q: Mr. Bryan, how much more research—how much more time would it take to have conclusive results that could be used here? You said these were emerging results?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: We—we first were able to receive the virus back in February, is when we started testing. And it is a science-based approach. Science is a process; the doctor can attest to that. It doesn’t necessarily line up with goals and targets and other things. It is what it is. But we are now starting to get results. And—and we’re—every week or two weeks, we’re starting to find out something new and something different.And in talking to the task force and the Vice President, he’s already asked us to come to him every time we come up with some new discoveries that we could be—that we could share to the public.THE PRESIDENT: Phil?Q: Yeah, sir, have you compared notes with your counterparts and other foreign governments or in private industry who might have been studying the same thing? And do their findings show the same result that you found here?ACTING UNDER SECRETARY BRYAN: We have. We do have a very good partnership with a lot of our allies. We work closely with them on this particular topic. We actually authored a document called the Master Questions List. If you go to DHS S&amp;T’s website, we’ve already had about 17,000 hits on this document. It actually outlines what all the countries in the world are doing to fill the certain gaps of knowledge that don’t exist within the virus and what we do know.And that is really what targets and drives the science community to say, “All right, what don’t we know now, so we don’t duplicate what other people have done?” So we’ve championed that document, it’s well referenced, and I would encourage you to look at that.THE PRESIDENT: And we are working with other countries on vaccines, as you know.Yeah. Go ahead. Please.Q: Thanks, Mr. President. If there is a summer ebb with this virus, what would the federal government need to do to take advantage of that time?THE PRESIDENT: Say it? In the beginning—what?Q: Oh, so if there is a summer, sort of, ebb with this virus, what would the federal government need to do to take advantage of that time to be better prepared for a possible resurgence in the fall than we were the first time?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I’ll tell you one thing: I think a lot of people are going to go outside all of a sudden. People that didn’t want to go outside, they’ll be going.This was a—to me this is very—really, a very interesting meeting. We covered it in great detail. And these are incredible people at that—we could call it a laboratory, because that’s essentially what it is. It’s a super laboratory. It’s a lot of things going on in that laboratory.Q: Right, but what would you —THE PRESIDENT: A lot of very interesting things going on in that laboratory.Yeah.Q: What would you and other areas that the government need to do on testing, for example, or other things like that to be prepared if it came back in the fall?THE PRESIDENT: Sure, Mike. Go ahead. Go ahead.Q: How would you take advantage of the summer?THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.THE VICE PRESIDENT: It’s—it’s actually a very good question. It’s something the task force already has begun discussing. That we are—if—a combination of factors.Let me say again: As states put into practice the Guidelines to Open Up America Again, implement safe and responsible plans to open up their economies along the lines that the President unveiled a week ago today; as people continue to properly exercise social distancing, as is recommended in each phase, that, in combination with some of these findings, could well give us a summer respite from the coronavirus.And our team is already speaking about working on a continuous basis through this summer. Every single day we’re increasing testing. Every single day, air bridge flights are coming into the country. There are—I can promise you, at the President’s direction, there will be no letting up on—on making sure that our hospitals have the equipment, have the personal protective supplies for medical personnel.There’ll be no letting up on the development of therapeutics by our great pharmaceutical companies that are driving toward a vaccine as soon as it is possible to make available to the public. And there’ll be no letting up on continuing to scale testing—already, more than anyone in the world. But by next fall, we’ll have a broad range of testing, a variety of different means.And that’s why we say with confidence that should the coronavirus reemerge at any point next fall or next winter, we will be prepared to deal with it, identify it, do the contact tracing and isolation to ensure that—that we—we deal with this epidemic in the manner that we—that we deal with infectious diseases.THE PRESIDENT: Okay. Yeah. Go ahead.Q: Mr. President, on the subject of medical research: Why have you stopped promoting hydroxychloroquine as a cure?THE PRESIDENT: I haven’t at all. I haven’t at all. What are you say-—we’ll see what happens.Q: You haven’t talked about it in several days.THE PRESIDENT: We’ve had a lot of very good results and we had some results that perhaps aren’t so good. I don’t know. I just read about one, but I also read many times good. So I haven’t at all. And it’s a—it’s a great—for malaria, for lupus, for other things. And we’ll see what it is.But, I guess, Deborah, they have many, many studies going on on that. So we’ll—we’ll be able to learn.Q: Have you looked at the veteran study that shows that—that the death rate is higher —THE PRESIDENT: I have not. I haven’t seen it. I have not seen it.Go ahead, please.Q: Mr. President, we’re now over 26 million new jobless claims over five weeks.THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Yeah.Q: How—the Vice President talked about this summer getting better. But how—what do your economists tell you about the time it’s going to take to you and the U.S. to create the jobs back?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I know a lot about economists.Q: August?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q: September?THE PRESIDENT: Sure.Q: October?THE PRESIDENT: Well, let me go. We—we know the rest of the question, right? So I—I know a lot about economists, and the answer is they have no idea. I think I have as good an idea as anybody, and I think our economy will start to pick up very substantially, as soon as the states get open.And that’s happening as we speak, and it’s actually very exciting, and people are just—just thrilled to see it, because our country has to get back to work. They want to get back to work. You see that, whether it’s a demonstration or just in talking to people. They’re going to get back to work, and they’re going to get back to work very fast.States are advanced. I look at Gavin Newson—was—Newsom was very nice today. He wrote a beautiful statement about—we sent him a lot of—a lot of things that he needed. Okay? Things—different things that he needed. We got—we got it taken care of. They’ve done very well in California, as you know. They’re doing really well in Florida. They’re doing well in a lot of places. New York and New Jersey got hit very hard. They’re doing very well.I spoke again with Governor Cuomo, with Governor Murphy. They’re doing—they’re doing a great job. And here’s the thing: We have to see. They got hit hard. Everyone close together—tight in. People don’t realize New Jersey is very tight. You realize that because you’ve been covering it for a long time, but very tight. New York obviously is very tight. They’re doing a terrific job.I—I think for the most part—I’ll be able to tell you when it’s all over, but a lot of the governors have done a really terrific job. Some I don’t think have, to be honest. But we’ll be talking about that in future.Yes, go ahead.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. In a new interview today with Time Magazine, Dr. Fauci said that the U.S. is not in a situation where we can say we are where we want to be, with regard to testing capacity. He said we need much more testing capacity, as well as tests. So why do you keep saying we have a tremendous testing capacity? And do we have a national strategy that goes beyond tracking just what the states are doing?THE PRESIDENT: The answer is yes. And the answer is—as you know, and as I’ve said many times—we’re very advanced in testing. Other countries are calling us to find out what are we doing.And, by the way, within two weeks, you’ll see numbers and you’ll see different forms of testing—just like we came up with the Abbott Laboratories machine, which gives it to you in five minutes—that everybody wants. Everybody is asking, “Can we get that?” But you can only make them so fast. But, as you know, we’ve done more testing than every other nation combined, and that’s a big statement.And, you know, when they talk about different tests and different things, we’re also a bigger nation than most. And so, when they look at statistics—because, statistically, we’re doing phenomenally, in terms of mortality, in terms of all of the different elements that you can judge. When you look, Germany and ourselves are doing very well.We are very accurate in the reporting of numbers. In fact, I’ll go a step further. As you know, in New York, they actually added quite a few deaths to a list that was done in New York. And they added a number of deaths. We’re very, very—highly accurate.And then you’ll look at certain lists of other countries. Some are so obvious just to look at, where obviously the number is ridiculous, in the form of low, because they’re not accurate counts. They’re not even close to accurate counts. In fact, they’re insulting to look at them.So we’ve done very well. Again, testing—we’re doing very well on testing. We’ve tested far more than anybody else anywhere in the world. And within a short period of time, you’ll be hearing about new tests that are coming out that are going to be incredible.Steve, go ahead.Q: Do you agree with Dr. Fauci that we’re just not there yet?THE PRESIDENT: No, I don’t agree with him on that. No, I think we’re doing a great job in testing. I don’t agree. If he said that, I don’t agree with him.Yes.Q: Are you considering ways to get—to ramp up production of that Abbott rapid test?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, well, they’re doing it. I’ll tell you, Steve, they—they’re doing it at a level that they’ve never done it before. Abbott is a great company. It’s a very big, highly respected company. They came up with this machine where you do it—I’ve done it both ways. I’ve done it this way and I didn’t like it. And I’ve done it the Abbott way, where you literally just touch and, five minutes later, you know the answer.And we use them in the White House. I think you folks have been given that opportunity, which is much more pleasant than the first way that they looked at you. Right?We’re making them—hundreds of thousands of machines. The advantage to the other tests and the laboratory tests is we can get millions and millions of those tests done. It takes a day or two days. But—you know, because it’s really a delivery situation, more than anything else. The test itself goes quickly once it gets to the laboratory.But as we have found and as we have, I think, shown everybody in the room, we have many laboratories. We have thou-—we have so many laboratories. Nobody—nobody—a lot of the governors did not know that we have this capacity, but we have many laboratories all over our country. Every state has laboratories and some have a lot of them. So I think we will—we will come up with things as time goes by.Again, when I started, we ended up—we—we started with nothing, essentially. What—we started with a broken test, a test that didn’t work. We started with a test that did very few people, not millions of people.The problem is, if we did 350-—if we did 350 million tests, one for each person, the media would say, “Oh, you should have done two for each person.” No matter what you do, it doesn’t make any difference.It’s just like the ventilators. I talk about it all the time. Nobody ever mentions ventilators. One of the hardest things are ventilators. And now we’re making thousands a week—thousands of ventilators. And they’re calling from Mexico; they’re calling from many countries.I’ve received today four calls. “Would it be possible to send ventilators?” Right? I got four calls today. I got three calls yesterday. No country is equipped like we are. We have 11—we have 11 different places making ventilators. Our country, as you know, doesn’t need them now. Our governors are very happy.But that’s different than test, because with a test you can always say, “Oh, we—we need more.” No, I think we’ve done incredibly well with—obviously, with ventilators. We’re—we also have 500 million masks—500 million masks that are very shortly going to be here. We’ve made millions of masks. We have ordered millions of masks that have arrived and been distributed.We gave one hospital in New York City 300,000 masks. Before the virus, they were using 10,000. And now we got them 300,000, and they got rid of them very quick, which I—quickly—which I sort of say, “How did that happen? Why?” Because they became very valuable—the masks. I say, “How did that happen?”But we got—we have—we’ve done an amazing job, and we’ve worked with the governors. And when the governors weren’t able—again, they’re the first line—when they weren’t able to get something—like ventilators, they couldn’t get ventilators. They could’ve bought them. You could have bought them, but most of them—many of them chose not to. So they all needed ventilators. We got the job done.We have—I’ll be introducing the team when we’re finished with this whole nightmare, this whole curse, this whole plague. But the team that worked on the ventilators was incredible. And the team that work—and it’s a little bit interchangeable, but the team that’s working on the testing is truly an incredible team. These are brilliant people. And they’re doing it for the country; they’re not doing it for other reasons.Some have been very successful. They’re doing it for the country.Q: Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Yes.Q: The House has now passed, since you were here, the relief bill.THE PRESIDENT: Great.Q: As you know —THE PRESIDENT: I’ll be signing it probably tonight.Q: As you know, there’s no aid to states and localities in that bill. Mitch McConnell, of course, has talked about states seeking bankruptcy protection.He’s also—his office referred to this as a—the idea of aiding states as a “blue state” bailout. What do you—what do say to that? Do you agree with that? Or do you agree with Governor Cuomo that that is a vicious attack on these states that have been hit by —THE PRESIDENT: I don’t know if it was a vicious attack, but certainly some people do look at it that way. I’ve spoken to Mitch about it; I’ve spoken to numerous senators about it. And we’re working with senators that are on the other side of the issue, and we’ll see what happens. But we’re looking to do what’s right for the people of this country. We’re looking to do what’s right for a particular state. And we’ll see what happens.But it’s certainly the next thing we’re going to be discussing because some states have—in all fairness, Jon, some states have not done very well for many years, long before the virus came. You know, you can’t blame the plague—this horrible plague that came in and, all of a sudden—you know, they can’t blame that. You look at Illinois—he’s got a lot of problems long before the virus came in. And so we’ll be talking about it. It’ll be a subject for a period of time.And right now, we’ve—we’ve made this incredible deal for the workers and for small business. And I’m very happy that Harvard didn’t get covered. We actually never sent them the check. But they were very nice about it. We never sent them the money. The old-fashioned way is the check; the new way is send them the money. And we didn’t send them the money.And—but they were very understanding and they were very nice about it. So was Princeton, so was Stanford, so were a number of other schools that you just don’t associate with this money. So were big companies, as you know. You know, many of them. It was a relatively small amount of money compared to the whole. A very small amount of money compared. But we want it to be fair. We want it to go to the people that it’s supposed to go to.Q: But are you open to this idea of state and local —THE PRESIDENT: I’m open. I’m open.Q: I mean, are these—are these —THE PRESIDENT: I’m open to ideas that are going to be great for the people of this country.Q: Specifically that idea?THE PRESIDENT: And if we can help states, we’re always going to help states.Now, there’s different ways of helping states. Some ways are better than others. So we’re looking. It is interesting that the states that are in trouble do happen to be blue. It is interesting, you know, if you look around. I mean, the states that seem to have the problem happen to be Democrat.Q: Well, New York and New Jersey got hit by this, you know, by this virus really hard, and Massachusetts —THE PRESIDENT: No, but New York and New Jersey were in a lot of trouble long before the plague came. I mean, they were—you know, they had a lot of problems long before the plague came. I spoke with Governor Cuomo about it, spoke to Governor Murphy about it. I spoke with Gavin Newsom about it. And we—I’m speaking to a lot of people about it, because it’s probably going to be the next thing on the list.A lot of people understand very well what Mitch is saying, and they also understand the other side of the—the problem. And I’ll be speaking about it. We’re going to do the right thing for our country. The right thing for our country and the right thing for a lot of great people. Okay?Yeah, please.Q: Yes, Mr. President, after the presentation we just saw about the heat and the humidity, is it dangerous for you to make people think they would be safe by going outside in the heat, considering that so many people are dying in Florida, considering that this virus has had an outbreak in Singapore, places that are hot and —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, here we go.Q:—are humid?THE PRESIDENT: Here we go. The new—the new headline is: “Trump Asks People to go Outside. That’s Dangerous.” Here we go. Same old group. You ready? I hope people enjoy the sun. And if it has an impact, that’s great. I’m just hearing this—not really for the first time. I mean, there’s been a rumor that—you know, a very nice rumor—that you go outside in the sun, or you have heat and it does have an effect on other viruses.But now we get it from one of the great laboratories of the world. I have to say, it covers a lot more territory than just this. This is—this is probably an easy thing, relatively speaking, for you.I would like you to speak to the medical doctors to see if there’s any way that you can apply light and heat to cure. You know—but if you could. And maybe you can, maybe you can’t. Again, I say, maybe you can, maybe you can’t. I’m not a doctor. But I’m like a person that has a good you know what.Q: But, sir, you’re the President.THE PRESIDENT: Deborah, have you ever heard of that? The heat and the light, relative to certain viruses, yes, but relative to this virus?DR. BIRX: Not as a treatment. I mean, certainly fever —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.DR. BIRX:—is a good thing. When you have a fever, it helps your body respond. But not as—I’ve not seen heat or (inaudible).THE PRESIDENT: I think it’s a great thing to look at. I mean, you know. Okay?Q: But respectfully, sir, you’re the President. And people tuning into these briefings, they want to get information and guidance and want to know what to do.THE PRESIDENT: Hey—hey, Phil.Q: They’re not looking for a rumor.THE PRESIDENT: Hey, Phil. I’m the President and you’re fake news. And you know what I’ll say to you? I’ll say it very nicely. I know you well.Q: Why do you say that?THE PRESIDENT: I know you well.Because I know the guy; I see what he writes. He’s a total faker.Q: He’s a good reporter.THE PRESIDENT: So, are you ready? Are you ready? Are you ready? It’s just a suggestion from a brilliant lab by a very, very smart, perhaps brilliant, man. He’s talking about sun. He’s talking about heat. And you see the numbers. So that’s it; that’s all I have. I’m just here to present talent. I’m here to present ideas, because we want ideas to get rid of this thing. And if heat is good and if sunlight is good, that’s a great thing as far as I’m concerned.Go ahead.Q: Mr. President, you talked a moment ago about vaccines and that we’re close. How close, do you think? The Oxford University study says they could have one by September. Do you think the pharmaceutical companies in the U.S. —THE PRESIDENT: They could have one of what?Q: They could—they could have a vaccine ready —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q:—for testing by September.THE PRESIDENT: Oxford is one. Johnson &amp; Johnson is working. They’re also working together. You have many companies working together on a vaccine.Q: But then, do you think they’ll scale—they can scale up production and the pharmaceutical companies will be able to do that quickly?THE PRESIDENT: Oh, we’ll scale it up. If we had a vaccine, it’ll be scaled up very quickly. In fact, some of the companies—Johnson &amp; Johnson is one—is scaling up already, before they have the final answer. A number of companies are doing that. You’ll save a lot of time. The normal is you scale up after.I have to say, the FDA has been fantastic. Stephen Hahn—Dr. Hahn—has been fantastic. They’re moving along rapidly. Rapidly.Q: Would you say—would you put a timescale on when you think this will —THE PRESIDENT: No, I don’t want to put a timescale because then the—the media, the so-called—so-called “media”—“lamestream” media will say, “He said a time.” I don’t want to say times, because every time I say a time, if you don’t hit it, they’ll say—so I don’t want to talk about time.But I will say that there’s been tremendous progress made over the last month.Q: Could I just ask a very quick question?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q: You spoke to Boris Johnson this week. I just wonder how —THE PRESIDENT: I did.Q:—how he sounded, how he was.THE PRESIDENT: I did.Q: When do you think he’ll be back at work?THE PRESIDENT: He called me a few days ago. I will tell you, he sounded incredible. I was actually surprised. I thought he’d be like, “Oh, Donald, how are you…” He was ready to go. I could—I’m very surprised to tell you this: It’s like the old Boris. Tremendous energy. Tremendous drive. I was very surprised, because he called me almost, you know, pretty close to when he got out of the hospital.I think he’s doing great. I think he’s doing great. He was so sharp and energetic. Pretty incredible. He’s an incredible guy.He’s a friend of ours and—and a friend of mine. He loves our country. He loves his country a lot. But he loves our country. He respects our country. And they’re lucky to have him over there.Please.Q: Mr. President, you, a couple days ago, said that you might reach out to Kim Jong Un directly, but also that you were working to find out if those reports about him being in possible medical trouble were true. I’m wondering if you’ve either —THE PRESIDENT: I hope he’s not in medical trouble.Q: Well —THE PRESIDENT: I hope he’s —Q:—have you heard anything from North Korea or —THE PRESIDENT: I’ve gotten along very well with him. And you know, here we are. You would have been in a war with North Korea if I didn’t get elected President. Remember, I was going to be the one that took us into war, with my first day in office. Okay? Here we are. Look at what’s happened. Withdrawal. We’re bringing people home. We’re not going to serve as policemen all over the world. I don’t want to be policemen all over the world.Q: But have you been able to leverage that relationship?THE PRESIDENT: And yet I’ve rebuilt our military to a level that it’s never been built at before.Q: Have you been able to get more information?THE PRESIDENT: But it’s never recognized by the fake news.Go ahead.Q: Have you been able to use that relationship to get more information about his status?THE PRESIDENT: Uh, I think the report was incorrect. Let me just put it that way. I think the report was done by a network that was incorrect.Q: So you blame —THE PRESIDENT: I’m hearing they used old documents. But I—that’s what I hear. I hear the report was an incorrect report. I hope it was an incorrect report.Q: When was the last time you heard from him?THE PRESIDENT: I don’t want to say.Yeah.Q: Since you pointed to me, just a quick question about that. So you haven’t made any contact, though? Just to make sure.THE PRESIDENT: With who?Q: The North Koreans.THE PRESIDENT: I don’t want to say. I won’t say that.Q: Okay, so —THE PRESIDENT: We have a good relationship with North Korea—as good as you can have. I mean, we have a good relationship with North Korea. I have a good relationship with Kim Jong Un, and I hope he’s okay. And somebody would say, “Oh, that’s terrible.” No, it’s not terrible. I hope he’s okay. And I think it was a fake report done by CNN.Q: So can I ask you a question?THE PRESIDENT: What do you have? Go ahead.Q: No, I would like —THE PRESIDENT: No, that’s enough.Go ahead.Q: Can I ask —Q: But that wasn’t my question.THE PRESIDENT: The problem is you don’t write the truth, so, you know, as far as I’m concerned —Q: What are you referencing?THE PRESIDENT:—I want to go—I want to go to the next question.Q: But can I ask you a question about Rick Bright?THE PRESIDENT: No, not CNN, please.Go ahead.Q: The White House has not responded —THE PRESIDENT: You don’t —Q:—to these allegations —THE PRESIDENT: I told you —Q:—to Rick Bright.THE PRESIDENT:—CNN is fake news. Don’t talk to me.Go ahead, please.Q: He says he was—but he says he was retaliated against and that’s why he was removed from his job. Do you have a response to that?THE PRESIDENT: Okay, next question.Q: Mr. President, I have two questions. One on behalf of a colleague who is not here because of social distancing.THE PRESIDENT: Just ask one, please.Q: First one: Could you talk about your decision-making process on—with the governor of Georgia?THE PRESIDENT: About what?Q: You, yesterday, said —THE PRESIDENT: The controversy?Q: Well, you know, you—no. You said yesterday that you told the governor of Georgia —THE PRESIDENT: I did.Q:—you were concerned about —THE PRESIDENT: I had a good talk with the governor of Georgia.Q: But there are reports that, earlier in the week, you spoke and you did not convey this kind of message. Was there a change in your thinking?THE PRESIDENT: I did convey the message. I didn’t like the fact that he’s leaving certain things—I want the states to open more than he does—much more than he does. But I didn’t like to see spas at this early stage, nor did the doctors. Is that a correct statement, Deborah?I didn’t like to see spas opening, frankly. I didn’t like to see a lot of things happening. And I wasn’t happy with it. And I wasn’t happy with Brian Kemp. I wasn’t at all happy, because—and I could have done something about it if I wanted to, but I’m saying let the governors do it. But I wasn’t happy with Brian Kemp. Spas, beauty parlors, tattoo parlors—no, that’s—that —Q: But did your thinking change after —THE PRESIDENT: And, by the way, I want them to open—excuse me.Q:—a conversation with your medical experts?THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me. I want them to open, and I want him to open as soon as possible. And I want the state to open. But I wasn’t happy with Brian Kemp. I will tell you that right now.Yeah, go ahead.Q: Sir, are you surprised he defied you on that? Because you made it clear —THE PRESIDENT: No, he didn’t. No, he didn’t defy me at all. That’s your language. He didn’t defy me.Q: Well, I mean, he’s not —THE PRESIDENT: You know what happened? I said, “You make your own decision.” I told him that. I said, “You’re not in the guidelines, but I’m letting you make your own decision. But I want people to be safe, and I want the people in Georgia to be safe, and I don’t want this thing to flare up because you’re deciding to do something that is not in the guidelines.”And I went to Deborah and Dr. Fauci and other people, and they weren’t thrilled about it. And I could have stopped him, but I decided—and we all agreed—they got to watch it closely. So we’ll see what happens.I told him very distinctly—I said—Mike was there—I said, “You do what you think is best.” But if you ask me, am I happy about it? I’m not happy about it, and I’m not happy about Brian Kemp.Go ahead.Q: A question for Dr. Birx, if I may, Mr. President, about the rate and the decline of the curve in the U.S. You and the Vice President tonight talking about meaningful progress, promising progress. Could you speak to the rate of decline of cases of in the U.S.?THE PRESIDENT: If we do it quickly, that would be great.Q: And just—if you’re satisfied with —THE PRESIDENT: Because you see it in the charts. I mean, you have to ask the question, but you do see it in the charts.Q: And if you have information from other countries that would inform us about the decline.DR. BIRX: Yeah, so, many of you—and I’ve spoken to all of you from this podium about there’s weekends’ difference in reporting, often a spike on Monday. If you look at Mondays over Mondays, if you look at seven-day reporting, we are starting to go down. We have a long—we had a long, flat peak, largely driven, of course, by New York, which is about 45 or so percent of the cases. As New York goes down, so will the rest of the country have a decline, even more accelerated.I want to say, though, we have had outbreaks. We’ve had outbreaks in specific prisons. We’ve had outbreaks in specific nursing homes. We’ve had outbreaks in specific plants. And when that happens, that adds two, three hundred, four hundred cases on that single date.So we track, very carefully, not only what the country is doing, but what each state is doing, each county is doing. And we look at delta changes across all of the counties so that we find early warning signals for these types of outbreaks, because we want to—we want the whole country to go down, but we also want to prevent the outbreaks before they occur.Q: Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead. Please.Q: Yes. Thank you. Looking forward to November, to the election, given the risk that the flu and the coronavirus are coming back —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, that’s a—that’s a problem.Q: Yeah—there could be a problem. Do you think there is a risk that there’ll be—there will be some—there will be lack of agreement, lack of legitimacy to the results in a very close election, and people start saying, “Well, a whole bunch of people couldn’t go and vote because they were scared”?THE PRESIDENT: Look, I can’t tell you what’s going to happen in an election.Q: Is there a risk for legitimate elections?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Great question. I can’t tell you what’s going to happen. We have a sleepy guy in a basement of a house that the press is giving a free pass to who doesn’t want to do debates because of COVID. And lots of things are happening. Right?And I watched a couple of interviews, and I say, “Oh, I look forward to this.” But they’re keeping him sheltered because of the coronavirus. And he’s not moving around; he’s not moving too much. And then I watch what the press does to the Republican Party—and to me, in particular.We had the greatest economy ever put together. We were doing—this is a month and a half ago. We were doing numbers, the like—the likes of which we’ve never done. African American, Asian American, Hispanic American—best employment numbers ever in the history of our country. Our employment numbers, the best in the history of our country: almost 160 million people. The stock market: record numbers, many, many times during my tenure. Many, many times.But now we have a country that we had to close because of this. And, frankly, if we didn’t close it, we would have lost millions of people possibly, but certainly we would have lost a million people. You take the high number and cut it in half, cut it in half again. But whether it would have been 600, 700, 800, you take a look at the travesty that there is. You take a look at this horrible, horrible scene of hospitals with bodies in black body bags, right? Multiply that times 10, 15, or even 20, because that would have happened.So we did the right thing. So far, we did the right thing. So far, we’ve called it right. We’ve mobilized like it was a military operation. And it was largely a militarily operation, between ventilators and testing and so many other things. And we’ve had a lot of good partners. Not all good partners, but we had a lot of good partners.Gavin Newsom today thanked us very much. Gavin Newsom—California—thanked us so much for getting him all the things that he needed so he can keep going and keep doing a good job. We got it to him today. Tomorrow, we’re getting him even more. It would’ve been harder for him to get it than us. We agreed to get it. We got it on time. He said, “Promises made, promises kept.” He actually said that in a statement today.We’ve done a good job. We’ve gotten very little credit for the great job we’ve done because of the media. Because the media is not an honest media, in my opinion. Much of it, not all of it. We have some great reporters that I have tremendous respect, but much of the media is not honest.So I can’t tell you about the election. You have a Democrat Party and you have a large portion of the media automatically giving the guy a pass. He’s been given a pass. Whether or not he’s going to be the nominee, I have no idea, but he’s getting a pass.And the media isn’t covering the great job that we’ve done, whether it’s Mike’s task force, which has been incredible; whether it’s the way we mobilized in a war-like operation to build these incredibly complex and very expensive ventilators. They’re very expensive to build and very complex. The job we’ve done has been an amazing job. And I’m not talking about me; I’m talking about everybody. I’m talking about the generals, the admirals, Deborah and Tony, and—and now Bill. I mean, something we hadn’t heard today.So I can’t tell you what’s going to happen with the election. I think that had we not gone through a fake Russia, Russia, Russia deal; an impeachment hoax—it was a total hoax. From the day I got elected—but, you know, it wasn’t the day; it was many months before I got elected—this has been a witch hunt that was illegal. It was an illegal witch hunt. It was illegal.And with all of that, I’m doing fine, because the people see we’re doing a great job. And you know what? We’ll continue to do a great job.If we had an honest press, this country would be even greater.Thank you. Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Okay. Thank you very much. Please. Thank you. A big day today at the White House. All of American society is engaged and mobilized in the war against the invisible enemy. While we must remain vigilant, it is clear that our aggressive strategy is working—and very strongly working, I might add.New cases are declining throughout the New York metropolitan area. Cases in the Detroit and Denver metro areas are flat. Washington, D.C.; Baltimore; Philadelphia; and St. Louis are showing great signs of progress, and new cases in Houston and New Orleans are declining.The battle continues, but the data suggests that nationwide we have passed the peak on new cases. Hopefully that will continue and we will continue to make great progress.These encouraging developments have put us in a very strong position to finalize guidelines for states on reopening the country, which we’ll be announcing. We’re going to be talking about that tomorrow. We’ll be having a news conference tomorrow sometime during the afternoon. We’re going to be announcing guidelines, and we’ll be talking about various states. And it’s very exciting.It’s been a horrible time to see such death and destruction, especially when you come out of what was the greatest economy in the history of the world. The greatest. There’s never been an economy like what we had produced, but we’ll produce it again. And I think we’ll produce it again very fast.The medical and healthcare advances we’ve made are critical to our continued progress. We’ve rapidly developed the most expansive and accurate testing system anywhere in the world and have completed more than 3.3 million tests. To date, we have authorized 48 separate coronavirus tests, and the FDA is working with 300 companies and labs to widen our capacity still further.Today, Abbott Labs announced that it has developed an antibody test that will determine if someone has been previously infected with the coronavirus and potentially developed immunity. It’s a great test. The company says these tests could be available to screen up to 20 million people in a matter of weeks.My administration is also distributing vast amounts of medical supplies to states across the country through Project Air Bridge, which has been an amazing success. We have completed 44 flights—and these are flights of very, very large airplanes, massive cargo planes—44 flights of critical supplies as of today and an additional 56 flights scheduled in the near future. We have some very brilliant people working on this. It’s logistically incredible what they’ve done. And we’ve also been working on this with the military. And these people have been—the genius of all of them together, it has been incredible to watch.In total, through all channels, the federal government has developed and delivered 39.4 million N95 masks, 431 million gloves, 57 million surgical masks, and 10.2 million gowns. We ordered 500 million masks, and they’ll be coming shortly. And we’ve distributed 100 million masks.Following our use of the Defense Production Act, GM announced that its first ventilators come off the assembly line in Kokomo, Indiana—a great place. They did it in 11 days, from start to finish, a remarkable testament to the ingenuity of the American worker. GM will ship over 600 ventilators this month alone, with thousands more to come. And we have other companies doing something similar.And I think they said that there’s a brief clip that we have of General Motors, sent to us by General Motors. And I think they might be wanting to play that for your benefit. Please.(A video is played.)I know you got a little bit nervous when you saw there was a clip about ready to be played, but that was sent to us by General Motors, and we thought it would be a good one to play. It’s amazing. It’s—you know, what they’ve done in a very, very short period of time.They’re now making thousands of ventilators, and they’re coming out of the factory very rapidly, at a clip that nobody can even believe. But we have others also doing it. And these are very high-grade ventilators. So we’re helping a lot of people. And at this moment, nobody needs them. We have to remember, during the surge, nobody has needed him for weeks now.But we’ll have them for stockpiles, and very importantly, we’re going to have them for other countries because nobody is able to do things like we can do. And we’re going to be able to help other countries that are having tremendous problems, to put it mildly.My administration is using every available authority to accelerate the development, study, and delivery of therapies—so important, therapies—treatments, and ultimately, what we want to come up with is a safe vaccine. But frankly, the therapies, to me, are the most important because it takes care of people right now. The vaccines have to be tested, so it takes a longer period of time. But we have some great potential therapies already, and we’ll see how they’re working. We’ll be able to report on that, I think, over the next week or two. Tremendous progress has been made.At least 35 clinical trials of promising therapies are now underway. So 35 different genius companies. If you look at AIDS, if you look at Ebola, if you look at so many things, they’ve come up with the answers to so many things, you wouldn’t have believed it. And we’re very honored to be working with them.They include antivirals, and also—and they—something which is incredible: It keeps the virus from multiplying. A mechanism that keeps the virus from multiplying. Immune therapies that prevent the immune system from overreaching to the virus. And convalescent plasma treatments that use antibodies from the blood of recovered patients.And we have a lot of patients who recover, and they’re so happy to have recovered that the first thing they do is say, “We want to give our blood.” And they do that. It’s incredible. We have thousands of people that are doing that. They recover and they feel they have an obligation because they’ve gotten such great care. And a lot of them didn’t think they were going to make it.As the entire U.S. government works to combat the global pandemic, it is absolutely essential that the key positions at relevant federal agencies are fully staffed. And we’re not allowing that to take place through our Congress. They’re just not—they’re just not giving it to us. We have many, many positions that are unstaffed because we can’t get the approvals. The Democrats are holding us up. We cannot get approval.We’ve gotten judges because we go through the process. I guess we’re up to 448 federal judges. And that, we’ve gotten because we focus on it; we take the maximum time. Because no matter who the judge is, they take vast numbers of days and hours to approve, and it leaves no time left for others. Very unfair system.If a judge is going to be approved in one hour, in one session, it doesn’t matter—they’ll take the maximum number of hours and days—you’re talking about days—to get one judge approved. And we’re close to 250 judges, but because of the way they’re doing it, there’s no time for anybody else. And many of these people have been waiting for two and a half years. We have a couple that have been waiting for longer than that.There are currently 129 nominees stuck in the Senate because of partisan obstruction. Many are nominated for vacancies that must be filled to assist with the coronavirus crisis and the resulting economic challenges. And I’ve read, over the last couple of years, “Well, I didn’t fill positions.” I don’t fill positions—in some cases, we don’t need the position, and I’m all for that. But in many cases, you do, but we can’t get them approved by the Democrats. They won’t release them.The positions include the Director of National Intelligence, two members of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the Assistant Secretary of Treasury for Financial Markets of the United States, and the Undersecretary of Agriculture responsible for administering food security programs. And Sonny Perdue, who’s going to be speaking today, is saying, “Please, can I have this man, can I have this particular person approved as soon as possible?” He’s been telling me that for a long time, and the Democrats won’t allow it to happen.Again, every single judge, every nominee we have goes through maximum, or at least they go through a long process. So it takes days and days, and there’s no time left. And it’s just a concerted effort to make life difficult.An example is Michael Pack. He’s my nominee for the CEO of the Broadcasking [sic]—Broadcasting Board of Governors. And he’s been stuck in committee for two years, preventing us from managing the Voice of America. Very important.And if you heard what’s coming out of the Voice of America, it’s disgusting. What—things they say are disgusting toward our country. And Michael Pack would get in and he’d do a great job, but he’s been waiting now for two years. Can’t get him approved.The senators left Washington until at least May 4th. The Constitution provides a mechanism for the President to fill positions in such circumstances—the “recess appointment,” it’s called—the Senate’s practice of dabbling into so-called pro forma sessions where no one is even there. It has prevented me from using the constitutional authority that we’re giving—that we’re given under the recess provisions.The Senate should either fulfill its duty and vote on my nominees or it should formally adjourn so that I can make recess appointments. We have a tremendous number of people that have to come into government—and now more so than ever before, because of the virus and the problem. We have to do it, and we have to do whatever we have to do. They’ve made it very, very difficult to run government. I don’t think any administration has done anywhere near what we’ve done in three and a half years.But every block—every week, they put up roadblocks, whether it’s “Russia, Russia, Russia,” or whether it’s impeachment hoax, or whatever it may be. It’s always roadblocks and a waste of time.If the House will not agree to that adjournment, I will exercise my constitutional authority to adjourn both chambers of Congress. The current practice of leaving town while conducting phony pro forma sessions is a dereliction of duty that the American people cannot afford during this crisis. It is a scam, what they do. It’s a scam, and everybody knows it. And it’s been that way for a long time. And perhaps it’s never done before—it’s never been done before; nobody is even sure if it has. But we’re going to do it. We need these people here. We need people for this crisis, and we don’t want to play any more political games.I’ve been waiting for two and a half years, three years, for some of these people. And they’re great people. They left law firms. They left jobs. They gave up everything to do it. And they’ve been waiting for three years, two and a half years, two years, one year to get approved. It’s ridiculous. And everyone knows they’re going to be approved. But there’s only so many hours in the day, when you go through judges and you go through a lengthy hearings on judges that they know should be approved immediately. And they could do it in one session, one—and they could do it in one hour. And instead, it takes them many days.In order to advance the health and security of our nation and all nations, as we announced yesterday, the U.S. government has put a hold on funding to the WHO—World Health Organization—pending a review of the organization’s cover-up and mismanagement of the coronavirus outbreak. Over the objections of the WHO, we took decisive action and early lifesaving action to suspend travel from China. They didn’t want to do it. They were angry that we did it. It was early on. They were angry that we did it. Took them a long time to realize what was going on, but I have a feeling they know exactly what was going on.Tragically, other nations put their trust in the WHO and they didn’t do any form of ban. And you see what happened to Italy. You see what happened to Spain. You see what happened to France. WHO’s guidance had failed to control their borders at a very crucial phase, quickly unleashing the contagion around the world. That was a horrible, tragic mistake—or perhaps they knew. I’m sure they didn’t know the gravity of it, but perhaps they knew. Because if they knew the gravity, that would be an even worse offense.To ease the economic pain of millions of American families, we’ve now processed $300 billion in loans to more than 1 million small businesses through the Paycheck Protection Program. This action has saved millions of American jobs. It’s been an incredible success. And they want to replenish it now, but, again, the Democrats don’t want to do that. This is money that goes to the workers of our country.Phase one was $350 billion dollars. And now phase two, we want to do $250 billion. This goes to workers and it goes to small businesses so we can save all the small businesses around our nation.Mike McFarland from Nebraska recently said this historic relief has been a godsend for his small factory, and the 136 Americans who work there. He saved those jobs. Another small business owner, Tim Miller from Oklahoma, called the program a total lifesaver for his auto-repair shop’s four employees. Stories like these underscore why Congress must replenish the Paycheck Protection Program immediately. The Republicans want to do it; they want to do it immediately. They want to do it now. And the Democrats are stopping it.A short time ago, CDC issued public health guidelines for critical industries. In a few moments, Agricultural Secretary Sonny Perdue will elaborate on how these guidelines apply to our nation’s dedicated workers in the food processing profession—because it’s a profession. It’s incredible what they do: food processing. And they’re keeping our grocery stores full. The shelves are not bare like the shelves that I inherited when we took over the stockpile—the medical stockpile, where the shelves were bare. “The cupboard was bare,” I say.Tomorrow, I’ll also be leading a call with elected officials who will consult with my administration as we work to restore our economy to full speed. And we really think, with all of the stimulus and all of the pent-up demand, we’re going to have an economy that really comes back quickly. And we’d like to see it more than match what we had before. What we had before was a miracle. And we think this is going to be even more than a miracle. We’re going to do it because we have the greatest people in the world.We’ll also be speaking to America’s governors tomorrow and then we’ll be announcing exactly what’s happening. You already know we’ll be opening up states—some states much sooner than others. And we think some of the states can actually open up before the deadline of May 1st. And I think that that will be a very exciting time indeed.Governors are looking forward—they’re chomping at the bit to get going. Again, not all states are the same. They’re very different. Some are having very little problems. Some have done such a good job that they have very little problem and they’re ready to go. So, Vice President Pence and I will be speaking with the governors tomorrow. We’ll be discussing procedures.Today, I spoke with the leaders of many of our nation’s most renowned companies and organizations on how to achieve the full resurgence of the American economy. My discussions included top leaders in health and healthcare, transportation technology, financial services, food, beverages, hospitality, real estate, retail, agriculture, construction, energy, labor, manufacturing, and sports industries.We want to get our country open again. We want to have our sports leagues open. You want to watch sports. It’s important. We miss sports. We miss everything. We want to get back.These experts and innovators provided extremely productive feedback on how to safely reboot our economy. They gave us a lot of great ideas. We spoke to a lot of very, very smart people—the highest of the high-tech. The level of IQ:on some of those calls was about the highest you’ve ever seen on a phone call, that I can tell you.But we have a lot of great thought went into those calls, and a lot of questions came out and also statements—very strong statements, as to what they recommend. It was—I think it was a great day. We did a lot of—a lot of calling with a lot of very prominent people—but, more importantly, very smart people and people that love our country.They talked about the vital importance of our wide array of relief measures to address the present crisis, and they provided valuable insights on how to move forward, including on the role of protective gear, where we have tremendous amounts of protective gear coming in; robust testing; and the future use of therapies and treatments.They also underscored the crucial importance of strong supply chains and communications infrastructure. We’re talking about infrastructure for the middle of our country. We’re talking about broadband and things that they, frankly, don’t have and haven’t had for a long time because a lot of politicians forgot about them. You can’t forget about them. They’re really the heart and soul. You can’t forget about them.And we’re talking about the telemedical. It’s a new thing, and it’s incredible what they’ve been able to do. This is an industry that’s just growing, but it’s take—it’s grown by leaps and bounds over the last five weeks. People are learning so much. Without the ability to see a doctor, they’re learning so much and a lot of good things are happening. That’s something that’s really, going forward, I think, going to be very important for our country.As we’ve seen throughout our proud history, America is never greater than when our people are working in unison toward a common goal. That’s what’s happening right now. We’ll go ahead. We’ll forge an even brighter future today than we had. And we’ll be—along with other nations, hopefully; we’re working with other nations—we’ll be the comeback kids. All of us. All of us.It’s incredible what’s going on. I’m very proud of the people of this country. I’m very proud of the people I spoke to today. These are truly great, brilliant people, and we’ve gained tremendous insight.So tomorrow is going to be a very big day. We’re going to be speaking with the governors. We’ll have some information on some openings. And again, we’ll have some openings that will be—will exceed our expectations. And they’ll be safe, they’ll be strong, but we want to get our country back. We want to get our country back. And we’re going to do it and we’re going to do it soon.With that, I’d like to ask Dr. Birx to come up and say a few words, and then Secretary Sonny Perdue, and then Vice President Pence. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.DR. BIRX: Thank you, Mr. President. And thank you for summarizing the states and what we’re seeing. So, over the last five to six days, we’ve seen declines in cases across the country and this has been very reassuring for us.At the same time, we know that mortality and the fatalities that we’re facing across the United States continue. We know the number of people who are still in the hospitals in the ICUs, and we want to continue to recognize the healthcare workers who are on the frontlines, and really recognize how low the United States case fatality rates are, compared to other countries. And this is really due not only to our technology, but how that technology is utilized to save lives.At the same time, I’m inspired by the American people who continue social distancing. These cases continue to decline because of the strong work of the American people.I also wanted to let you know that we do have nine states that have less than 1,000 cases and less than 30 new cases per day. So we’re looking at states and metro areas as individual—individual areas.We talked before how each of these curves are different. Each of the case’s experiences are different. We have some states—like California and Washington State, Oregon—that never really had a peak because of so much work that their populations did to decrease and keep the new cases down. So each of these individual states and individual metros are being studied very specifically.I do want to highlight—and we are remaining concerned and we’ve been having discussions with Rhode Island. Rhode Island and Providence are in a unique situation. First, they had increasing cases from the New York City area, and now they have new increasing cases from the Boston area. They are caught between two incredible hotspots in the country. They’re doing an extraordinary job. They’re caring for the individuals on the frontlines, but Providence continues to have new cases.And we do continue to work with specific states that have specific outbreaks related to individual occurrences. I will just remind the American people again: This is a highly contagious virus. Social gatherings, coming together is—there’s always a chance that a asymptomatic person can spread the virus unknowingly. No one is intending to spread the virus. We know if you are sick, you will stay home. But to all of you that are out there that would like to join together and just have that dinner party for 20: Don’t do it yet. Continue to follow the presidential guidelines.We really appreciate the work of the American people. We see, as a country, we’re improving. We see, as metro areas, we’re improving. We see, as communities, as counties, and as states, we’re improving, but that also still requires everyone to continue to social distance.And in the end, we do have states that have very few cases and very few new cases. And so, these are the ones the President is referring to that have been silent—relatively silent—throughout this epidemic and pandemic that many of us have faced. And so, these are the groups we are working with very specifically. And each of these governors and each of these mayors will have to make decisions, after generalized guidelines are put out, so that they can do what’s best for their communities. They are at the frontline.And I wanted to conclude by really thanking my PEPFAR teams around the world who have been working tirelessly throughout the world to ensure that Africa and Asia doesn’t experience this level of infections that we have seen here. They’ve turned over their capacities from their embassies. Our U.S. hires throughout the world, our ambassadors are still on the frontline with our local staff, working with ministries of health, to confront this virus around the globe. And I assure you that they are continuing to invest in the health structures, the laboratory, and the frontline care to ensure that all of the work that we have done against TB, HIV, and malaria continues. But that we use our capacity, our laboratories, our clinics, our hospitals that have been built by the American people and the generosity of the American people to really combat this COVID-19 around the globe.Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Thank you, Doctor.Sonny, please.SECRETARY PERDUE: Thank you, Mr. President, for the opportunity to be here with you today and to—I want you to know it’s an honor to represent you in leading the Department of Agriculture and represent the constituency who are crucial in maintaining our nation’s food security, enabling us to keep food on the table of our American families—not only just food, but wholesome and safe food as well.I’d like to start my remarks today by echoing what my colleagues at the CDC have been saying regarding the health and safety of our essential employees across the United States. CDC has provided strategies there that aimed at helping our most critical workers, both in healthcare and food processing, to quickly and safely return to work after potential exposure to COVID-19, provided those workers are symptom-free. And this guidance will help these critical industries in the food sector provide—to protect the health and safety of essential workers, while keeping critical functions working throughout the COVID-19 response.As we know, any employee who develops symptoms while on the job should go home immediately. And the interim guidance is in line with CDC recommendations for healthcare workers, caring for those sick with COVID-19.So we appreciate the dedication and commitment of all the brave men and working—women working to keep their communities fed. And we will continue to work with the CDC to keep those individuals as safe as possible during these challenging times.In that vein, there’s been a lot happening this week, as COVID-19 is impacting food-processing facilities, as you know. For Americans who be—may be worried about access to good food because of this, I want to assure you: The American food supply is strong, resilient, and safe. And in fact, our food supply chain has shown tremendous agility in shifting production and logistics so suddenly from restaurant and institutional settings to retail settings.To all the employers out there in this sector: It’s critical that you follow CDC guidelines and guidance and best practices to keep all of your employees and people safe and healthy.To employees and local public health officials advising them: The CDC has issued guidelines on how to mitigate a situation if you have a positive case in one of your facilities. We need our local health authorities and our state health authorities to do everything they can to balance the demand of keeping our facilities operational and our critical industries going, while at the same time keeping the health and safety of employees as a top priority, as well as our communities.So I want to also take this time to thank all of our critical, essential food supply chain workers. The entire country is counting on these patriotic individuals, by doing the work in our food supply chain. These dedicated workers include, obviously, farmers and producers, but also processers, truckers, and grocery store workers, as you know.America is depending on what you have—the food we need to feed our families—and you’re the ones who are making that happen. Thank you.As an entire nation, we’re truly thankful for the work you’re doing, and we recognize that you are the true patriotic heroes during this national emergency, along with our healthcare workers.So, before I sign off here, Mr. President, I want to remind you and all of us of one more thing: In the United States, we have plenty of food for all of our citizens. I want to be clear: The bare store shelves that you may see in some cities in the country are a demand issue, not a supply issue. The way food is prepared and packaged to be sold in a restaurant or a school is significantly different than the way it’s packaged for you to buy in the grocery store. Our supply chain is sophisticated, efficient, integrated, and synchronized, and it’s taken us a few days to relocate the misalignment between institutional settings and grocery settings. But that does not mean that we don’t have enough food in this country to feed the American people.You might think of it as an interstate when it’s flowing in along well, and you have a crash in one place—it backs up. And that’s what’s happening in the food supply chain. But we’re working through that.And all this—through all this, our food supply chain has proven to be very resilient, just like American people. To the extent we have challenges, we have and continue to—to work through it all together. And we can and we will get through this with a whole-of-America approach, Mr. President—the critical partnership between state and local health officials, management of companies, and the employees. And we will meet any challenges we face by working together.Thank you, sir, for the opportunity.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. And before the Vice President comes up, I just wanted to say, speaking of Sonny, China has paid us billions of dollars—many, many billions of dollars—in tariffs, which we’ve distributed—some to the farmers, because they were targeted. We have many billions of dollars being held by Sonny. And I’ve told him to distribute much of that money to the farmers.Our farmers were targeted and now they’re benefiting by the amount that they were targeted. And we are very honored to do that. And, Sonny, you’re going to start that process very soon. You’ll let the farmers know. Nobody can take advantage of our farmers.So we have a lot of money that we’ve taken in from China. We’re going to be distributing that money from—from Sonny to the farmers. And there is tremendous money over and above that. That money was paid directly into the Treasury of the United States.This has never happened to China before. They never gave us 10 cents. Now they’re paying us billions of dollars and we appreciate it.So thank you very much, Sonny. Great job.Please. Mike, please.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. President. The White House Coronavirus Task Force met today. It was reported to us that we’ve conducted and completed 3,324,000 tests across the nation. More than 619,000 Americans have tested positive. But as you reflected yesterday when we welcomed coronavirus survivors here to the White House from across the country, some more than 45,000 Americans have fully recovered.Sadly, we mourn the loss of more than 27,000 of our—our countrymen. Our hearts are with their families and with the families of all of those that continue to struggle with the serious consequences of this illness. But as Dr. Birx just reflected, despite the heartbreaking losses, we’re getting there, America.Because of the efforts of people all across this country to put into practice the President’s Coronavirus Guidelines, because of their adherence to the direction of state and local authorities, as Dr. Birx just reflected, we—we see great signs of progress from the West Coast to the East Coast.President Trump has directed our team to develop new guidelines that will be presented tomorrow to our nation’s governors and—and released to the American people thereafter.The American people will be encouraged to know that, as we stand here today, 24 percent of the counties of this country have no reported coronavirus cases. In fact, half of the states in America have less than 2,500 cases per state. This is a great tribute to the efforts by the people of those communities.But as the President suggested, when we unveil the guidelines that the team has been working to present tomorrow to our nation’s governors, we’re going to reflect on the fact that, as the President said, there will be areas of the country that will require continued mitigation and strong efforts. And there will be other areas of the country that will be—be given guidance for greater flexibility, and the President has so directed our team.When we think of more than 619,000 Americans having tested positive, more than 45,000 having recovered, we wanted to announce today that the FDA recently announced efforts to facilitate the development and access to convalescent plasma, Mr. President. You’ve spoken about this. People who have recovered from the coronavirus have antibodies in your bloodstream that can attack the virus.The Mayo Clinic today is working with the Red Cross to make sure that coronavirus patients have access to the convalescent plasma treatments, and over 1,000 institutions across America have already joined this program.And we want to urge every American who has recovered from the coronavirus for at least two—and preferably four weeks, to contact your local blood or plasma donation center and arrange to donate. It’s one more way that the American people can do their part and step forward. And thousands have already done so, and we know that tens of thousands will join them.On the subject of supplies—Mr. President, I’ll be very brief because you detailed a great amount. As the President mentioned, the air bridge has completed 44 flights. Fifty-six more are scheduled.But on the subject of facial masks, which are so important for the protection of critical infrastructure, I’m pleased to report that the average daily delivery through the commercial network through our air bridge is 22 million facial masks coming into the marketplace. The average inventory in the network over a seven-day period is 80 million masks. And FEMA is actually working, as we speak, to move facial masks to priority infrastructure: food supply, first responders. There’ll be 6.5 million masks that go out before the end of this week, an additional 20 million before April the 20th, and then we’ll be adding 6.5 million each and every week.At that the President’s direction, we’re going to ensure that all of those that work in food supply, all of those first responders have access to masks. And we’re increasing those every day.Finally, I know I speak for the President when I say how proud we are of all of our healthcare workers across the country, and how proud we are of the men and women in uniform—our medical professionals who have been deployed across the nation, literally by the thousands.In fact, as we stand here today, 576 doctors, nurses, and other military medical professionals have been deployed to 13 hospitals across the nation: 10 in New York, and 1 in Connecticut, Texas, and Louisiana each.And, as the President reflected a few days ago, because we did not have the—happily, did not have the demand on the Javits Center and on the Comfort in New York City, at the President’s direction, we have deployed doctors and nurses from those two facilities to hospitals. In fact, the President and I were just speaking to Mayor de Blasio just before we came out, and he expressed his great admiration and appreciation for the relief that these medical military personnel have provided to incredibly dedicated people in our hospitals. Two hundred and fifty-eight medical personnel just yesterday were deployed off the ship and out of the Javits Center into New York.With that, Mr. President, I’ll step aside. But it’s remarkable to think of all that we’ve accomplished over the last month since you first issued the Presidential Guidelines for America.The truth is, because of what the American people have done over the last 30 days, we are slowing the spread. We are ensuring that every American family would have access to the healthcare that we’d want any member of our family to have—with the greatest healthcare professionals in the world. We’re saving lives and we’re healing our land.And so we want to thank the American people for all you have done. And tomorrow, we’ll be presenting a new guidance to the governors of this country about how we build on our progress and reopen America in a safe and responsible way.Thank you, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mike. Great. Thank you, Mike.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. On the recess appointments, Mr. President, if I could. Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Steve, please.Q: You’ve mentioned the possibility of adjourning both the chambers of Congress. Can you explain what you meant by that, sir?THE PRESIDENT: Very simple: If they don’t act on getting these people approved that we need because of the—we need them anyway, but we especially need now because of the pandemic—we are going to do something that will be something I’d prefer not doing, but which I should do and I will do if I have to.Kaitlan, go ahead.Q: I have two questions for you. One, on a call with business leaders today, they said testing has got to be ramped up significantly before the country—before they feel comfortable reopening their stores —THE PRESIDENT: Sure.Q:—their restaurants, and what-not. Isn’t that what health officials and state governors have been telling you?THE PRESIDENT: It’s what I want too. And we have great tests. And we want the states to administer these tests, for the most part. But we’re standing behind them. We have great tests. We’ve done more testing now than any country, as you know, in the world, by far.We have the best tests of any country in the world. Nobody have—has the quality of tests, the—if you look at Abbott, what they’ve come up with in a short period of time. They’ve been incredible. Roche has been incredible. We have the best tests in the world.And we will be working very much with the governors of the states. We want them to do it. We’re not going to be running a parking lot in Arkansas. We’re not going to be running a parking lot, where you have a Walmart—which has been great, by the way; Walmart has done a fantastic job—but where you have a testing center and running that from Washington, D.C. The states are much better equipped to do it.But we’ll be working with the states. We’re standing behind the states. We’re going to work very closely with the governors, in terms of that—getting additional equipment. It used to be three, four weeks ago—two weeks ago, “Can we get more ventilators?” More ventilators, right? And we got them ventilators, and you don’t hear that anymore. It’s been pretty amazing, what we’ve been able to do.Yeah. Go ahead, Jon.Q: You talked about Walmart —Q: Mr. President —Q: A lot of the equipment (inaudible), a lot of those testing centers are still for first responders and healthcare workers who have symptoms only. When is it going to be widespread enough to where these companies can feel comfortable being open? Will that happen in two weeks?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think the companies will determine that, and the governors will determine that, and the federal government will de-—and if we’re not happy, we’ll take very strong action against a state or a governor. If we’re not happy with the job a governor is doing, we’ll let them know about it. And, as you know, we have very strong action we can take, including a closedown, but we don’t want to do that.We’re working with the governors and we’re working closely with the governors. The relationship has been very good. The Vice President has had a lot of conversations over the last two weeks with either 50 or almost 50 governors on every conversation. And they’ve been really positive conversations.Q: (Inaudible) close down?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we have the right to do whatever we want. But we wouldn’t do that. But, no, we would have the right to close down what they’re doing if we want to do that. But we don’t want to do that —Q: (Inaudible) what the states are doing?THE PRESIDENT:—and I don’t think there’ll be any reason to do that, but we have the right to do that.Steve? Go ahead. Go ahead.Q: You got me already.Q: Mr. President, why did you have your name added to these coronavirus relief checks?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t know too much about it, but I understand my name is there. I don’t know where they’re going, how they’re going. I do understand it’s not delaying anything. And I’m satisfied with that. I don’t—I don’t imagine it’s a big deal. I’m sure people will be very happy to get a big, fat, beautiful check and my name is on it.Yeah. Go ahead, please.Q: Mr. President—Mr. President —Q: Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please. Please.Q: Mr. President, previous Presidents never did this. Why—why are you —THE PRESIDENT: Please. Please. Go ahead.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Dr. Birx just said that Rhode Island is seeing an increase in cases from people that are coming from Boston and New York. You just said you’d like to reopen some states before May 1. How will you stop a second spike in cases if people are traveling between states? How will you control the flow of people traveling over —THE PRESIDENT: Well, the governors can control that flow, as an example. In fact, I just saw, a little while ago, it was reported that certain borders are being controlled already by states. They’re starting to take control of their borders, which is good. So they’ll be controlling. They may do testing for people wanting to come in; I’d read that about Rhode Island. So they have to watch it. They have to be very careful.Yeah, please. In the back.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. About reopening the country again, you said, “along with other nations.” What form would it take? Are you considering, also, relaxing the border between Canada and the U.S.?THE PRESIDENT: So our relationship with Canada is very good. We’ll talk about that. It will be one of the early borders to be released. Canada is doing well. We’re doing well. We’ll see. But at some point, we’ll be doing that.In the meantime, nations that are heavily infected—we have a lot of nations that are heavily infected. Some are getting better. Some are still on the way up, unfortunately. We’re keeping very strong borders with those nations. But with Canada, we are talking about different things.Yeah, please.Q: Mr. President, you said the—the evidence suggests that nationwide we have passed the peak on new cases. What’s your evidence for that? What are the numbers saying?THE PRESIDENT: Well, all we’re doing is looking at the numbers, we’re looking at our graphs, we’re looking at our models. We’re getting a great response from Deborah and from Tony and from many of the professionals that are working. We have great professionals working with us. And, I think, based on that, we’re—we’re doing very well.Based on that, it looks like we’re headed absolutely in the right direction. But some states are looking at other states, and they’re saying, “I can’t imagine what they’re going through”—because they’re not in that position. They’re in very good shape.I would say that we have 20 states, at least, but you really have 29 that are in extremely good shape. You have others that are getting much better. And I think, with almost a few exceptions, you have every state that is either doing better or on the way to doing better.Yeah, please.Q: Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, go ahead.Q: Thank you, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.Q: On your threat to adjourn or—adjourn Congress, on—clearly, you have the power: Article Two, Section Three. But that would be quite radical to do.Earlier last month, you were in the Oval Office, talking about, “Now is not the time for partisanship.” How will that act lower the partisanship in this town? And could it potentially hinder your ability to get something done on coronavirus? And then —THE PRESIDENT: Well, it is—it’s—look, it’s been a very partisan government for a long period of time, not just this administration. You can go back into the last two administrations; you’ve seen a lot of partisanship. And even now, you would think that we wouldn’t have.As an example, with the Paycheck Plan, that’s going so well. It’s so smooth, so beautiful, almost without a hitch. All of that money is being distributed to small businesses. They’re giving it to their employees. It’s keeping them ready, viable. So when we open—and now, it’s been so good that it’s almost depleted and we want to replenish it, and we can’t get the Democrats to approve it. And that’s a program that they and everybody else admit that are great.So, you do have partisanship. We have been trying for years to get people approved for positions. People have left—one man left a law firm. One man left a—a big chain. He was a very successful executive; he left. It was two years ago. We have people that have been waiting for three years. And we can’t get them approved by the Democrats in the Senate because they’re taking so long to approve our judges.Now, I have to tell you that I’m totally in favor of what Mitch is doing with judges, because that’s—always seems to be a priority and it’s a very important priority. I think it’s one of the great trademarks of this administration: We’ve approved record numbers of federal judges and appellate judges and two Supreme Court judges.But rather than approving somebody who’s highly qualified—somebody that everybody knows is going to be approved—rather than going quickly, they take the maximum amount of time, whatever that time may be. And what they’re doing by doing that is taking days to approve somebody that could be approved in a quick vote. People that get phenomenal reviews in committee are going maximum number of hours. And what they do is—there’s only so many hours in a day.Now, we could have said, “Let’s stay.” I would have been in favor of that. They didn’t choose to do it. But I have a very strong power. I’d rather not use that power, but we have way over 100 people that we very badly need in this administration that should have been approved a long time ago. And one of them is the head of Voice of America. If you look at what they’re doing and what they’re saying about our country, it’s a disgrace—the people that are running that. We have somebody that’s really good, really talented, and that loves our country. And I want to get these people approved.That’s one of many. We have professionals. Sonny, you’ve been waiting for—how long have you been waiting for the man that we’re talking about coming in?SECRETARY PERDUE: Two and a half years.THE PRESIDENT: Two and a half years. So Sonny Perdue just happens to be here talking about something else. So you’ve been waiting for one of the most important position, as Secretary of Agriculture, is the position—it’s distribution. We need it now. We’re talking about shelves. We’re talking about cupboards. He needs it. He’s been waiting—he didn’t know he was going to get this question. You’ve been waiting two and a half years.The person is exceptional. That person left a very good job. And it’s embarrassing to me. He’ll say, “Do you think you’ll get that man approved?” He’s been saying that to me for a long time. It’s because of the Democrats.And what we’re doing is—and I think anybody here would do it—judges are a priority. A federal judge is going to sit for 50 years, potentially—a young judge. Going to be sitting for—that’s always going to have to be a priority.But because they’re taking so much time and approving every—they’re trying to put us through the mill. That’s—when you talk about partisanship—and it’s never ever happened before. You can look at every administration in the history of this country. Nobody—nobody has ever had hundreds of people not approved after three and a half years.Go ahead, please.Q: What’s the timeline for that though? If Congress doesn’t act by—when? Do you have a date?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we’ll know soon. Look, they know. I—they’ve been warned and they’re being warned right now. If they don’t approve it, then we’re going to go this route. And we’ll probably be challenged in court, and we’ll see who wins.But when the court hears that we aren’t getting people approved—as Sonny would say, for two and a half years—for an important position that we need because of this crisis—we needed these people before, but now we really need these people.Q: Mr. President, when you talk about—back to the numbers for a second. When you talk about the numbers—the jobless claims are going to come out tomorrow. It’s likely around 5 million more Americans putting their names in for unemployment benefits. But yet, there are still a couple thousand people, as well, dying a day because of coronavirus.When you talk about opening up the American economy—or at least in parts—now, how do you balance that decision out, given both of those figures?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we are. There has to be a balance. You know, there’s also death involved in keeping it closed. And I’ve gone over this with you, and I believe this so strongly. When you look at mental health, when you look at suicides; suicide hotlines, which are exploding; people losing their jobs. When you look at drugs, and people that didn’t take drugs and now they’re becoming drug addicted because they’re going through a problem. They have no job. They have no money coming in—other than the money we’re getting them. We’ve opened up the coffers to a large extent. We’re helping people.This is why I wish the Democrats would help us a little bit with it, because they should. It’s purely partisan what they’re doing, and it’s bad for our country. But—but, you know, there is death by doing—by having this strongly closed country. We have to get back to work.With all of that being said, we’re going to start with states and with governors that have done a great job. And they’re going to open it up as they see fit. And we’re going to be right behind them. And we’re—we’re going to be working. We’re going to be supplying them with things if they don’t have them. We want them to have them.We’re going to be helping them with ventilators after this is over so that they can’t say, “Oh, the federal government…” We want them to have—they’ve had a lot of options. Many of the governors have had a lot of options, over the years, to buy ventilators. They didn’t choose to do it. So we’re going to be helping them to fill up their stockpiles. We’re going to have plenty. And as I said, I’m very proud to do it.We’re going to be helping other nations. We’re going to be helping Italy, Spain, France, other nations. And we’re going to be helping them strongly. I think Russia is going to need ventilators. They’re having a hard time in Moscow. We’re going to help them. We’re going to help other countries that need ventilators.We’re going to have a lot. You see it with General Motors. You see it with other companies that are producing. We’re going to have hundreds of thousands of ventilators. And it’s a great thing to have.Yes, in the back. Please. Is anybody freezing? (Laughter.) You know, it’s very cold out here. So we can leave early, right? (Laughter.)Okay, a couple more. Go ahead. Please.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Why do we have 20 percent of the world’s deaths from the coronavirus when we’re only 4 percent of the world’s population?THE PRESIDENT: Well, you don’t know what you have. Do you think you’re getting honest numbers from some of these countries? Do you really believe those numbers in this vast country called China—and that they have a certain number of cases and a certain number of deaths—does anybody really believe that?Here’s the story: We report everything. We’re reporting the cases, and our reporting is good. We’re reporting every death. In fact, I see, this morning, where New York added 3,000 deaths because they died. And they’re now saying—rather than, “It was a heart attack”—they’re saying, “It was a heart attack caused by this.” So they’re adding. If you look at it, that’s it.And everything we have is documented, reported. And what they are doing is, just in case, they’re calling it this. And that’s okay. That’s okay. But we are—we have more cases because we do more reporting. We have more cases because everything is down.But does anybody really believe the numbers of some of these countries that you’ve been watching and you’ve been reporting on? And then, it’s like they didn’t have the big thing. They have been some really, really bad—heavily—and really, some countries that are in big, big trouble. And they’re not reporting the facts. And that’s up to them.All I know is: We report the facts, and we’re a country that’s getting better.John, go ahead.Q: Mr. President, multiple sources are telling Fox News today that the United States government now has high confidence that, while the coronavirus is a naturally occurring virus, it emanated from a virology lab in Wuhan. That, because of lax safety protocols, an intern was infected, who later infected her boyfriend, and then went to the wet market in Wuhan where it began to spread. Does that correspond with what you have heard from officials?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t want to say that, John. But I will tell you, more and more, we’re hearing the story. And we’ll see. When you say “multiple sources”—now there’s a case where you can use the word “sources”—but we are doing a very thorough examination of this horrible situation that happened.Go ahead, please.Q: In your many conversations with President Xi, Mr. President, did you ever discuss with him State Department concerns about lax safety protocols that had been reported to the State Department from the embassy in Beijing about that laboratory?THE PRESIDENT: I don’t want to discuss what I talked to him about the laboratory. I just don’t want to discuss it. It’s inappropriate right now.Please, go ahead, in the back.Q: Tim Arvier from Channel 9 Australia. There have been calls in our country for Prime Minister Scott Morrison to make funding for WHO conditional on reforms to the organization. I wanted to get your thoughts on that, and if you had any advice for Mr. Morrison.THE PRESIDENT: Look, I feel very badly about the World Health Organization, but it’s been a tool of China. It’s been, as I say, totally China-centric. You take a look at everything that’s happened; they’ve been wrong. I was all for it at the beginning. What do I know? I walked in, I said, “World Health Organization—isn’t that wonderful?” And then you start to see all the mistakes. They didn’t want us to close our borders to China—to Wuhan, specifically. They didn’t want our borders closed.You take a look—Mike was there; we were all there—and they’re criticizing me for closing the border. I did that very early. By the way, I did that very early, while Nancy Pelosi was trying to have, in San Francisco, parties in Chinatown. Because they—she thought it would be great. She wanted to show that this thing doesn’t exist. These are people—I’ll tell you, we have some politicians on the other side that don’t know what they’re doing.If you look at—if you look at timelines—you’ve got to look at some timelines. But the World—the World Health Organization, just like the World Trade Organization—I’m telling you—I call them—they have been treating the United States, for decades, so badly. And they’ve been so in favor of China.China took off when it joined the World Trade Organization because of what’s happened. Think of it: They’re considered a developing nation. And because they’re a dev-—and we’re not. But we’re a developing nation too, in my book. Okay? We’re developing too.But the fact is: We have been treated so badly by these organizations. And, believe me, I’m looking at that one too. We’re winning a lot of lawsuits right now that we never won before in the past. We’re winning a lot of money that we never won in the past. That’s with the World Trade. But with the World Health Organization—what’s happened there is a disgrace.Here’s the other thing: We pay $400- to $500 million a year. China is paying $38-, $39-, and $40 million a year. And it’s like they control this group. I could do that too, if I want to devote full time to it. I have some very capable people dealing with Dr. Tedros. Okay? I could do it too. I could do very well with that. But there’s something going on. There’s something going on that is very bad.Now, the $500 million that we save, we’ll determine—we’re going to make a determination over a little period of time. But they’re going to either have to make massive changes—I don’t even know if they’re going to be able to do that—or we’re going to give money to people. We want to help people. You know, what we do in Africa with AIDS—people have no idea what we do and the money we spent. We were talking about it the other day, Doctor.We are spending billions of dollars to help people. In the case of one that Dr. Birx is very much involved in, AIDS—billions of dollars. And you know what? It’s a great thing. Nobody talks about it. Nobody gives us credit. We do that, and we do it very directly.But we’re spending billions of dollars to help people live and—all over the world. But we’re spending $500 million to the World Health Organization, and there’s something very bad going on. And you know what? I’ve gotten very much involved. It’s been going on for a long period of time, and we don’t want to be the suckers anymore.So, it’s cold out. We will talk to you tomorrow. A big day tomorrow. Very big day. Thank you. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, everyone. My administration will do everything possible to help those communities get back on their feet. We’re speaking with the governors and representatives. FEMA is already on its way, and they got there—as soon as we heard the word, I said, “Get out there.” So FEMA is there, and you know the great job that FEMA does. It’s, really, something very special.So we just want to say: Warmest condolences, and we’re with you all the way. It’s a tough deal. That was a bad, bed level five. That was a bad group. That’s as high as it gets. It was a bad grouping of tornadoes. Something that’s something incredible, the power—the horrible, destructive power.America is continuing to make critical progress in our war against the virus. Over the weekend, the number of daily new infections remained flat nationwide. Flat. Hospitalizations are slowing in hotspots like New York, New Jersey, Michigan, and Louisiana. This is clear evidence that our aggressive strategy to combat the virus is working and that Americans are following the guidelines. It’s been incredible what they’ve done.You looked at the charts, and the charts are—and the models from early on—predictions were 100 [thousand] and 120,000 people look like. If they did well, they were going to unfortunately perish. And we’re going to be, hopefully, way, way below that number. So that will be a sign of people doing things right, but it’s still just a horrible thing all over the world. A hundred and eighty-four countries.This is all a tribute to our wonderful healthcare advisors and experts who have been with us right from the beginning. We appreciate it so much. In fact, Dr. Fauci is here. Maybe I could ask Tony to say a few words before we go any further.Thank you very much. Tony, please.DR. FAUCI: Thank you, Mr. President. Just one—a couple of things, and then I just want to make a comment about something that happened yesterday.You’re going to hear from Dr. Birx soon about the numbers that we’ve been talking about and how things are starting to balance off. And I think the more, as we go by each day, I think we’re going to see—and again, I never like to get ahead of myself or of Dr. Birx, but it looks like even though we’ve had a really bad week last week—remember, when I was speaking to you before, I was saying this was really a bad week—there’s still going to be a lot of deaths, but we’re starting to see in some areas now that kind of flattening, particularly in a place that was a hotspot like New York. That’s the first thing.The second thing is that I had a really very, very productive conversation with the Congressional Black Caucus this morning, for about an hour, and they really wanted to know what exactly are we going to be doing in the immediate, as well as the long range, about the health disparities and the discrepancies both in infection and in poor outcome in the minorities in general, but specifically African American.And, I mean, I made it very clear to them that what we have to do is focus on getting the resources where the vulnerable are, to be able to get testing done, to be able to get the appropriate identification, where proper and where appropriate, to isolate and contact trace if we can, but also to help mitigate in a community that is suffering and suffering much more disproportionately.So I just wanted to get that out of the way.The other point I wanted to make is that I had an interview yesterday that I was asked a hypothetical question. And hypothetical questions sometimes can get you into some difficulty because it’s what “would have” or “could have.” The nature of the hypothetical question was: If, in fact, we had mitigated earlier, could lives have been saved? And the answer to my question was, as I always do—and I’m doing right now—perfectly honestly say, “yes.” I mean, obviously. If you—mitigation helps.I’ve been up here many times telling you that mitigation works. So if mitigation works, and you instigated and—you initiated earlier, you will probably have saved more lives. If you initiated it later, you probably would have lost more lives, if you initiated at a certain time.That was taken as a way that maybe, somehow, something was at fault here.So let me tell you from my experience—and I can only speak from my own experience—is that we had been talking, before any meetings that we had, about the pros and the cons, the effectiveness or not, of strong mitigations. So discussions were going on mostly among the medical people about what that would mean.The first and only time that Dr. Birx and I went in and formally made a recommendation to the President to actually have a, quote, “shutdown” in the sense of—not really “shutdown” but to really have strong mitigation, we discussed it. Obviously, there would be concern by some that, in fact, that might have some negative consequences. Nonetheless, the President listened to the recommendation and went to the mitigation.The next second time that I went with Dr. Birx in—to the President and said, “Fifteen days are not enough. We need to go thirty days,” obviously, there were people who had a problem with that because of the potential secondary effects. Nonetheless, at that time, the President went with the health recommendations, and we extended it another 30 days.So I can only tell you what I know and what my recommendations were. But, clearly, as happens all the time, there were interpretations of that response to a hypothetical question that I just thought it would be very nice for me to clarify because I didn’t have the chance to clarify.Thank you.Q: The date on that?DR. FAUCI: Excuse me?Q: The date.DR. FAUCI: You know, to be honest with you, I don’t even remember what the date was. But I can just tell you the first and only time that I went in and said we should do mitigation strongly, the response was, “Yes, we’ll do it.”Q: And what did he do? Was that the travel restrictions?DR. FAUCI: No. The travel restriction is separate. That was whether or not we wanted to go into a mitigation stage of 15 days of mitigation. The travel was another recommendation, when we went in and said, “We probably should be doing that.” And the answer was “yes.” And then another time was, “We should do it with Europe,” and the answer was “yes.” And the next time, “We should do it with the UK,” and the answer was “yes.”Q: In this interview, you said there was pushback.DR. FAUCI: Yeah.Q: Where did that pushback come from?DR. FAUCI: No, it wasn’t—that was the wrong choice of words. You know what it was? When people discuss, not necessarily in front of the President—when people discuss, they say, “Well, you know, this is going to have maybe a harmful effect on this or on that.” So it was a poor choice of words. There wasn’t anybody saying, “No, you shouldn’t do that.”Q: Are you doing this voluntarily? Or did the President —DR. FAUCI: No, I’m doing it —Q:—or Vice President ask you to do this?DR. FAUCI: Everything I do is voluntarily. Please. Don’t even imply that.Q: So, Mr. President, the question is —THE PRESIDENT: And, by the way, the travel ban, that was earlier. The travel ban was done earlier.Q: You couldn’t give us a date when he talked to you.THE PRESIDENT: And if you look at statistics—I happened to write a couple of them down. If you look at statistics—so, on January 6th—that’s long before the dates you’re talking about—there were—CDC issued a travel notice for Wuhan, China, a notice, before there was even a confirmed case of the virus in the United States. That’s on January 6th. This is all documented. Because we have so much fake news, I like to document things. January 6th, long before the dates we’re talking about, CDC issued travel notice to Wuhan—for Wuhan.On January 11th, we have zero cases in the United States. Zero. We don’t have any cases. So there are no cases reported that we know of. This is January 11th. The CDC issued a level one travel notice health—for health, while there were still no confirmed cases. So we had zero cases. People want me to act. I’m supposed to close down the economy—the greatest economy in the history of the world—and we don’t have one case confirmed in the United States. That’s January 11th.On January 17th, the CDC began implementing public health entry screenings at three major U.S. airports that received the greatest volume of passengers from Wuhan, at my instructions. There was not a single case of the coronavirus in the United States. So on January 17th, there wasn’t a case, and the fake news is saying, “Oh, he didn’t act fast enough.” Well, you remember what happened. Because when I did act, I was criticized by Nancy Pelosi, by Sleepy Joe Biden. I was criticized by everybody. In fact, I was called xenophobic. I was asking Biden to please define that for me. I was called other things by Democrats and some others—not too many others, actually. So that—by the media, definitely.Now, on January 21st—this is long before the time we’re talking, because when Tony is talking, I believe he’s talking about the end of February. On January 21st, okay—still early—there was one case of the virus. At that time, we called it the “Wuhan virus,” right? Wuhan. There was one case in the whole United States. We have one case. This is all documented. It all comes from you. A lot of it comes from you people.On January 21st, the CDC activated an emergency operation center. There was just one case, one person. That’s why that ad was such a phony. There was one person in the United States. You know they used the ad, “There’s only one person…” That statement was made at that time. One case. In the whole United States, one case. I’m supposed to shut down the government? The biggest—the biggest economy in the history of the world. “Shut it down. We have one case.”Seven cases were on January 31st. Now, on January 21st, there was a case. Not one person had died. You heard that, Steve, right? Not one person.So we have this massive country, the United States of America. We have the greatest economy in the world—bigger than China’s, by a lot—right?—because of what we’ve done over the last three and a half years, prior to the virus, but including the virus. So we have the biggest economy, the greatest economy we’ve ever had; the highest employment numbers; the best employment numbers; best unemployment numbers also. The best of everything.So, on January 31st—think of it—not one person has died. Not one. Nobody died. Not one, Jon. I don’t think you’ll find any. This is reported by CDC, confirmed by the news—which doesn’t mean anything to me because they don’t tell the truth. But CDC reported: January 31st, not one person has died.And I issued a travel restriction from China. Think of it. So nobody died, and I issued. You can’t get earlier than that.So we have nobody died, and I said, “China, you can’t come in. I’m sorry.” Because I saw what was going on. It wasn’t so much what I was told; it was that I saw what was going on and I didn’t like it. But I didn’t speak to Tony about it. Didn’t speak to very many people about it. I didn’t like it.So what did I do? Ready? January 31st: In the United States, not one person had died because of the—again, the Wuhan virus. So I issued travel restrictions on that date, even though nobody died, and I got brutalized over it by the press because I was way too early; I shouldn’t have done it. Brutalized by the press. But, you know, sort of—I’ve been brutalized for the last four years. I used to do well before I decided to run for politics. But I guess I’m doing okay because, to the best of my knowledge, I’m the President of the United States, despite the things that are said.So, then, first mandatory quarantine in more than 50 years, we did. First mandatory in 50 years. The same restrictions that the Democrats and the media called “xenophobic.” Now, Joe Biden said, “He’s a racist.” He called me a racist because I said, “We’re shutting down entry from China. We’re shutting it down.” He called me xenophobic, and he called me racist and other things.Since then, on a Friday night, two weeks ago, Joe Biden issued a state-—it wasn’t him; he didn’t write it. I’m sure he doesn’t even know that it was issued. But the people from his campaign—who are smart. The people that write those little PR releases are pretty smart, reasonably good. Not the best, but they’re not bad. But they issued a statement, saying that Joe Biden agrees that the Pres-—that President Trump was right to close it down to China. Now, he did that.Now, he issued it on Friday night. We’ve all heard about that, Jon—Friday nights, right? In fact, his was later Friday night than I ever released mine on Friday night. Okay?Q: (Inaudible) seems pretty late.THE PRESIDENT: So he did—he did it pretty late. I mean, you know, like at 11 o’clock in the evening or something. You know, that’s pretty late. Anyway. So Joe Biden issued—and it’s one of those things.But, in February, Nancy Pelosi said we should come to Chinatown. This is late February. “Come to Chinatown. We think it’s very safe. Come here. Let’s all have the big parade—Chinatown parade.” Probably referring to San Francisco. And that’s it.But I took this action early. And so the story in the New York Times was a total fake. It’s a fake newspaper and they write fake stories. And someday—hopefully in five years, when I’m not here—those papers are all going out of business because nobody is going to want to read them. But now they like them because they write about me.Now, with that, I have a couple of interesting—we have a few clips that we’re just going to put up. We could turn the lights a little bit lower. I think you’ll find them interesting. And then we’ll answer some questions. I’ll ask you some questions because you’re so guilty, but forget it. But most importantly, we’re going to get back onto the reason we’re here, which is the success we’re having. Okay?Please, you could put it on. Thank you.(A video is played.)So we could give you hundreds of clips like that from governors—including Democratic or “Democrat,” as I call them, governors, which is actually the correct term. We could give you hundreds of clips just like that. We have them. We didn’t want this to go on too long, but I just want to say it’s—you know, it’s very sad when people write false stories like, in that case, I guess it was gotten mostly from the New York Times, which is a highly—I mean, if you had libel laws, they would have been out of business even before they’ll end up going out of business. So it’s too bad.But we could have given you—you saw the statements. We have hundreds of statements. Hundreds of statements, including from Democrats and Democrat governors.And if you look, they were all saying, “We need ventilators. We need…” You don’t hear “ventilators” anymore. They have all the ventilators they need, which we were right about. We said, “You’re asking for too many. You don’t need that.” And, in all fairness, these two people right here—Dr. Birx, Dr. Fauci—they said, “I don’t think they need that many ventilators.” And I said, “I agree.”At one point—and I’m not knocking New York for this, but they were asking—you remember?—40,000 ventilators. And that’s more than they have all over the country. And we got them a lot of ventilators, and nobody has complained.We got them, as you know, beautiful—we built hospital rooms all over the country. The governor of Louisiana, John Bel Edwards, was very nice. He said, “You know what? You don’t have to build a second hospital.” Because good news is happening. They’re not able to fill the beds. They needed two hospitals. We built one; it was perfect. We’re getting—we’re just starting the other. I called him up. I said, “Do you think we should build the second one? I don’t think you’re going to need it.” He said, “Let me get back.” He got back. We didn’t need it.With Governor Cuomo, in all good spirit and faith, he wanted to have the Jacob Javits Center done. And we built 2,900 incredible beds. Incredible. Then we make it—we made it COVID—and—or, to be exactly accurate, COVID-19, and—which was a lot of work. We had to change the ductwork. We had to seal up certain areas. We had to put areas of rooftop things over the beds. We did a lot of work. And we had it—but they never really had too much use for it.And they called also—Mayor de Blasio, rightfully, he called. He said, “Would it be possible to get more medical help?” So, now, not only are we building facilities, we’re—they’re asking us for help because they’re unable to man it. And we got him the help. We got Mayor de Blasio a lot of help.Then, when the Javits Center wasn’t used much—and then, as you know, the Mercy—and we took the Mercy and we took the Comfort, and we made them both—Los Angeles and New York—we made them COVID-adaptable, which was not easy to do. And we didn’t get almost any people sent there. They didn’t need them at the beginning because they didn’t need it for anything but this because there were fewer accidents, fewer motorcycles, fewer everything.And what we did was like an incredible job, but they didn’t need them. It turned out—they were there. We were ready. You know the expression? They have an expression: “Ready, willing, and able.” We were ready, willing, and able. What the Army Corps of Engineers did was a miracle. What—what FEMA did was a miracle. What the doctors did.So I got a call two days ago from the mayor of New York. He said, “Could you help us even more with medical personnel?” And we sent—I think it was 448 doctors, nurses, and respiratory experts. Real experts. And I got a call from the mayor and he said, “I want to tell you: Incredible—these people are incredible.” He said, “They lifted the spirits of the hospital workers from New York City like nothing I’ve ever seen.” He’s—he was unbelievable, what he said. It was really appreciated. And I let them know that. I let the military people—he said, “They went in there so brave, so incredible. They lifted the spirits of everybody.”We did all of this work, but when you read the phony stories, you—nobody—nobody acknowledges this. And it doesn’t have to be acknowledged, from my standpoint, but it does have to be acknowledged from the great work that these doctors, nurses, the Army Corps of Engineers, FEMA—all these people, they’ve done this incredible job. And they shouldn’t be abused because—you take a look at what’s happened. Nobody is asking for ventilators, except outside of our country.Outside of our country, they’re calling me—every country. They’re calling me. So many countries. And I’m going to try and help them because we have thousands of ventilators being built. But nobody is asking for ventilators. Nobody is asking for beds because we built hospitals. I think we built 20,000 beds in a period of a couple of weeks.The job they’ve done is incredible. With all of that being said, I’m getting along very well with governors. And if I wouldn’t, Mike Pence had a call today with the governors and it was like a 10. I said, “How was it?” He said, “It’s a 10.” He was one of my expressions, actually. But he said it was like a 10.And I’m sure you people were probably on the call, although you weren’t supposed to be. But you were sitting in somebody’s office listening to it, because every time we have these—and, you know, and you would know that for weeks those calls have been very good. But there wasn’t a raised voice. There wasn’t even a statement of like, “We think you should do this or that.” I heard it was, like, just a perfect phone call. It might not be reported that way. They’ll say, “I thought that somebody maybe slightly raised…” Didn’t even raise a voice.My only point of saying this, because I want to get back to why we’re here: The press has not treated these incredible people who’ve done such a great job, they haven’t treated them fairly. They’re way off. We were way ahead of schedule.And remember this—because the Times story was a fake—but everything—remember this: Everything we did, I was criticized because I was too early. If I waited longer, it would have been—you would have been critic-—if I went way early, if I went three months earlier, I would have been criticized—you know, criticized for being way too early.So, with all of that being said, we understand it. I think I’ve educated a lot of people as to the press. And I would love to be able to say that we have a very honest press. Honestly, Jon, there’d be nothing I would be more proud of if the press would work—and I don’t mind being criticized, but not when they’re wrong. Not when people have done a great job.Yes.Q: Can I just ask you about the video? Because I’ve never seen a video like that played in this room. It looks a bit like a campaign ad. Who—who produced that video for you?THE PRESIDENT: That was done by a group in the office, and it was done just by—we just put some clips together. I could give you—I’ll bet you I have over 100 more clips even better than them. They were just pieced together over the last two hours. That was just—oh, we have far better than that. That’s nothing compared to some of them.Q: But this was produced here in the White House by —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, this was done by Dan and a group of people, and they just put it together in a period of probably less than two hours.Q: Why did you feel the need to do that?THE PRESIDENT: Because we’re getting fake news, and I like to have it corrected. They’re saying what a great job we’re doing, and the media—these are the governors of California, governor of New Jersey, governor of New York.Look, in New York, we work very close with Andrew. In New York, ventilators—we’re going to be probably—we didn’t—they didn’t have a problem. We got them tremendous numbers of—thousands, but we got them a tremendous number of ventilator. You don’t hear ventilators are a problem. Beds were going to be a problem. I mean, I’m happy about it. The Javits Center, which is incredible, is almost empty because they don’t need them. That’s good news, not bad news. I’m—you know, I’m not saying, “Gee, I wish more people were there.” I don’t want more people there.We brought in the boat. We brought in the Comfort. And the Comfort was originally not supposed to be for this at all—the coronavirus. It was not supposed to be for that at all. They called, they said, “Could we have it?” That was a number of weeks ago. We said, “We don’t think you need it, but if you need it, we’ll do it.” Then they said, “Could you get the medical personnel to run the Javits Center? Could you get the medical personnel to run the ship?” We said, “If it’s necessary, we will.” And we did. There were military personnel. That’s the ones that Mayor de Blasio was so great to, in terms of his statements. I mean, I really appreciated his statements. He was so impressed with them, and I am too. The level of genius and bravery. They’re great people, the military people.And we pieced that together—I would say it took less than two hours. It was done in house.Steve?Q: But just to be clear, this was produced by government employees, by people here at the White House—this campaign-style video here?THE PRESIDENT: I wouldn’t use the word “produced.” All they did was took some clips, and they just ran them for you. And the reason they did is to keep you honest. Now, I don’t think that’s going to work. It’s not going to have any impact. But just think of it: You heard the clips, you heard what I said. They said I acted late on closing down the country.Some people wish we never closed it down. Now, if we didn’t, we would have lost hundreds of thousands of people. You know, interestingly—so I’m—I’m against that. We did the right thing. Everything we did was right. If we would have closed down —Q: You don’t think you made any mistakes along the way here? You think everything you did was right?THE PRESIDENT: Well—well, look, governors should have had ventilators; they chose not to have them. We were able to get them ventilators. You haven’t heard—other than, you know, there was a lot of panic, a lot of screaming, “We want ventilators.” They got the ventilators. You don’t have that anymore. And the surge is supposed to be coming now. And if they do need ventilators, Jon, we’ve got almost 10,000 that are ready to rock. We have people standing with those ventilators right now. If you needed 2,000 in New York, which you don’t, but if you did, we can have them here in less than 24 hours. We’re ready to rock. This was a great—this was a great military—and beyond that—operation.Let’s get back to the regular. Shouldn’t we get back to the regular? We could talk about this, but all I’m doing is this: I could have given you—like, those are four or five clips that we just played for you. I could have given you hundreds of people—I mean, Gavin was on television two days ago with one of your competitors, singing praises. He says, “Look…” You know, the question was asked in a negative way. He said, “Look, I know what you want to say but—want me to say, but he’s been really good. It’s hard for me to say that. In fact, it’s impossible for me to say it.” Gavin Newsom, the governor of California.I have many clips from many—I have some clips from Anthony, that I didn’t want to put up, which were really good. I think Anthony would be the first one to say, when I closed the country to China, when I closed the—the China ban, whatever you want to call it—Anthony said I saved a lot of lives by doing that. I mean, am I correct? I don’t want to put words in Anthony’s mouth, by the way, and I like him.Today, I walk in and I hear I’m going to fire him. I’m not firing—I think he’s a wonderful guy.Q: But why did you tweet something that said “Fire Fauci”? Why did you —Q: You retweeted the hashtag #FireFauci.THE PRESIDENT: I retweeted somebody. I don’t know. They said “fire.” It doesn’t matter.Q: Did you notice that when you retweeted it?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, I notice everything.Q: So you retweeted it even though it said, “Time to fire Fauci”?THE PRESIDENT: No, no, that’s somebody’s opinion. All that is is an opinion.Q: But you read it and you elevated it.THE PRESIDENT: No, I was called about that. I said, “I’m not firing him.” In fact, if you ask your friends in the office—in the public relations office, I was immediately called upon that. And I said, “No, I like him. I think he’s terrific.” Because this was a person’s view. Not everybody is happy with Anthony. Not everybody is happy with everybody.But I will tell you, we have done a job, the likes of which nobody has ever done. The mobilization, getting of equipment, all of the things we’ve done—nobody has ever done a job like this.We have 50 governors—and territories, by the way. People don’t ever mention that we have territories. We have 50 governors and territories, and many of those governors are Democrats, and they can’t find anything to complain about. And honestly, many of them didn’t do their jobs. I’ll let you know someday—let’s see what happens—but I may let you know who’s not doing their job. I can tell you the ones that are good, both Republican and Democrat, and the ones who don’t know what they’re doing. But we help some of the ones that don’t know what they’re doing. They should have had their own stockpiles. And now, if they want, we can build them stockpiles of ventilators.The hardest thing is a ventilator, because it’s expensive, it takes a while to get. We got them, and nobody believed we did.Now, many of the governors were asking for far too many. And we said they were asking for far too many. We talked and we said—you said very strongly that they just don’t need that many. You said they don’t need that many beds—Deborah.So that’s it. Steve, go ahead.Q: To be clear, you and Dr. Fauci are on the same page?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, we have been from the beginning. I don’t know what it is exactly. But if I put somebody’s opinion up—you know, I don’t mind controversy. I think controversy is a good thing, not a bad thing. But I want it to be honest controversy.Now, when I got a call—I got a call not very quickly; nobody, you know, saw that as being any big deal—they said, “How are you doing with Dr. Fauci?” I said, “I’m doing great.” And I didn’t talk to Dr. Fauci, even until we just got here. Dr. Fauci asked one of the people if he could get up and speak, and he did.Q: So he said that once you —THE PRESIDENT: And they totally misinterpreted him. I saw what they did.Q: Can I—can I ask you? He said the question was hypothetical. But what he was just acknowledging is that lives would have been saved if the mitigation practices were put into place earlier. That seems obvious. Do you not agree with that?THE PRESIDENT: Here’s the thing. No, no. What he really is saying though: “But how could you have done it?” Look, I just went over stats with you. Right here. Right here.How do you close it up? You have no deaths and no cases on January 11th. Doctor, would you recommend closing the United States of America?” “Oh, this must be terrible. How many cases do we have?” “None.” How many deaths do we have?” “None.”January 17th—go back another week. On January 17th—this is 10 days before I did the—little bit less than 10 days before I did the ban. I did a ban on China. You think that was easy? I then did a ban on Europe. And a lot of people said that was an incredible thing to do, because you look at Spain—and, by the way, we’re doing very well because when you look at all of those flat graphs and you add it all up, the United States is very low, and per capita we’re very low. We’re doing very well.But how do you close up the United States of America? So, on January 6th, no deaths. On January 11th, no deaths. And no—no cases. On January 17th, no cases, no cases, no deaths. I’m supposed to close up the United States of America when I have no cases?Q: You didn’t close down until the middle of March. “Should you have closed it down earlier?”—that’s the question.THE PRESIDENT: I closed down from China.Q: It’s not about January.THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me, I closed it down from China. And, by the way, some people think I should have waited longer and maybe ridden it out. I disagree with them. Okay? But it was thought of. I mean, that was an alternative. You know, there are a lot of people that would have said, “Let’s ride it out.” Now, I’ll give you the good news. If I would have done that, it would have been, I think, catastrophic because their numbers are, Anthony, 1.6 to 2.2 million people would have died if we tried to do that.And I did this last time: Cut it in half. Don’t say 2.2 million. Cut it in more than half. Say a million people died—well, that’s much more than the Civil War. Cut it in half. Take the million and cut it in half; that’s 500,000 people would have died. Now, that number we would have reached. Okay? That would have been easy to reach if we did nothing. So we did the right thing, and our timing was very good.But here’s the one thing—and you have to say this—when you ask me, “Why didn’t you do this?”—how come when I did the ban on China and some very, very—instituted some very tough things, how come Nancy Pelosi, a month later, is in Chinatown, saying, “Let’s all march. This is not going to happen”? How come we have many of the experts from CNN and many other networks—if you call CNN a network; I don’t, personally. But we have CNN, we have many other places, and they’re all saying, “He doesn’t need to do it. He doesn’t need to do it.”All I’m saying is this: How do you close down the greatest economy in the history of the world when, on January 17th, you have no cases and no death; when on January 21st, you have one case and no death? One case. Think of it. Now, we’re supposed to close down the country?But here’s what happened: When, on January 31st, I instituted the ban, Joe Biden went crazy. He said, “You don’t need the ban. You…” He didn’t go crazy. Like, he has—he didn’t even know what the hell the ban was. But he—so he didn’t go crazy. But he did say —Q: Your ban bought you time.THE PRESIDENT: He did call me xenophobic.Q: What did you do with that time?THE PRESIDENT: Wait a minute. He called me xenophobic; he called me a racist because—he has since apologized and he said I did the right thing. So when you say, “Why didn’t you do this?” Every Democrat thought I made a mistake when I did it. I saved tens of thousands, maybe hundreds of thousands of lives, by doing that.Q: But what did you do with that time that you bought? The argument is that you bought yourself some time and you didn’t use it to prepare hospitals, you didn’t use it to ramp up testing. Right now —THE PRESIDENT: You’re so—you’re so —Q:—nearly 20 million people are unemployed.THE PRESIDENT: You’re so disgraceful. It’s so disgraceful the way you say that.Q: Tens of thousands of Americans are dead.THE PRESIDENT: Let me just—listen.Q: How is this sizzle reel —THE PRESIDENT: I just went over it.Q:—or this rant supposed to make people feel confident —THE PRESIDENT: I just went over it.Q:—in an unprecedented crisis?THE PRESIDENT: Nobody thought we should do it. And when I did it —Q: But what did you do with the time that you bought?THE PRESIDENT: You know what we did?Q: The month of February. That —THE PRESIDENT: You know what we did?Q: That video has a gap. The entire month of February.THE PRESIDENT: What do you do—what do you do when you have no case in the whole United States when you —Q: You had cases in February.THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me. You reported it: zero cases, zero deaths on January 17th.Q: January.Q: January, February—the entire month of February.THE PRESIDENT: January. I said in January.Q: Your video has a complete gap: the month of February.THE PRESIDENT: On January 30th —Q: What did your administration do in February with the time that your travel ban bought you?THE PRESIDENT: A lot.Q: What?THE PRESIDENT: A lot. And, in fact, we’ll give you a list—what we did. In fact, part of it was up there. We did a lot.Q: It wasn’t in the video. The video had a gap.THE PRESIDENT: Look. Look, you know you’re a fake. You know that. Your whole network—the way you cover it—is fake. And most of you—and not all of you—but the people are wise to you. That’s why you have a lower—a lower approval rating than you’ve ever had before, times probably three.Q: Twenty million people now are unemployed.THE PRESIDENT: And when you ask me that questions —Q: Tens of thousands of people are dead, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Let me ask you this: Why didn’t Biden—why did Biden apologize? Why did he write a letter of apology?Q: I don’t think the unemployed people right now care about why Joe Biden didn’t apologize to you, sir.THE PRESIDENT: Why did the Democrats think that I acted too quickly? You know why? Because they really thought that I acted too quickly. We have done a great job.Q: So get us the list of what you did in February.THE PRESIDENT: Now, I could’ve—I could’ve kept it open. And I could’ve done what some countries are doing. They’re getting beat up pretty badly. I could have kept it open. I thought of keeping it open because nobody has ever heard of closing down a country, let alone the United States of America. But if I would have done that, we would have had hundreds of thousands of people that would right now be dead.We’ve done this right. And we really—we really have done this right. The problem is the press doesn’t cover it the way it should be.Go ahead. One more question. Steve, go ahead.Q: There’s a debate over what authority you have to order the country reopened. What authority do you have?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I have the ultimate authority, but we’re going to get into that in a minute. We’re going to just finish this up. We’re going to tell you about other things that we’ve done right.But I will say this: Had we said, “Let’s just keep going and let’s not do a closing”—whether it’s 2.2 that they, at one point, predicted as an outside or 1.6 at a lower number; you cut it all the way down to 6- or 7- or 800,000; take just a fraction of the number that could have happened, it literally would have been more than the Civil War. It would have been a disaster.So, the minimum number was 100,000. And I think—I feel pretty good that we’re going to be substantially below, Anthony, the 100,000. And I hope we will.All right. So, today, the Department of Health and Human Services is announcing five new contracts to procure large numbers of additional ventilators under the Defense Production Act, which we used a lot, by the way—which you didn’t like to talk about—in addition to the 1,300 we received today. We received, today, 1,300 additional ventilators. Now, we’re probably not going to need them, but we can add that to our stockpile, which is very big, and we can move it around should the surge take place and should it be a very substantial surge. We’re ready to—we’re ready to rock.The contracts are with General Electric, Hillrom, Medtronic, ResMed, and Vyaire, combined with the DPA contracts that we announced last week with General Motors and Philips and two other contracts with Hamilton and ZOLL. We’re adding 6,190 ventilators to the Strategic National Stockpile, of which we have a lot already—thousands—close to 10,000. But this will be added by May 8th, another 29,000 by the end of May. And more than 120,000 total we will have by the end of the year.Now, we’re going to help other countries. We’re going to help states if they need it. We may help some states’ stockpile. You know, they’re supposed to buy their own stockpile. They have state stockpiles. They’re supposed to be using that. And unfortunately, most of the states weren’t there. And a lot of people didn’t want to talk about it, but they weren’t there. We will talk about it at the right time, if you want to. I—at this point, I’m more focused on getting past this nightmare of a epidemic or a pandemic—anything you want to call it. We got to get past it.No one who has needed a ventilator has not gotten a ventilator. Think of that. You know, you heard all about ventilators, ventilators. “We need ventilators.” Because they didn’t have them. Because the states should have had them. No one who has needed a ventilator has not gotten a ventilator. No one who has needed a hospital bed has been denied a hospital bed. That’s not even really our responsibility.Now, if we can help, we’re going to do it. But that’s where the Army Corps of Engineers did such a great job. We built over 20,000 beds. In fact, we built thousands more than we’ve actually needed to be safe. We wanted to be safe and we really—they rose to this incredible occasion.I mean, we built more beds than we thought. We thought, in Louisiana, we were going heavy. And again, when I called the governor, I said, “Maybe we shouldn’t build that second hospital, because we don’t want to build it if you don’t need it.” He called back, he said, “I don’t think we’re going to need it.” They had 1,000 rooms, 1,000 beds, and they used a lot of them, but they didn’t need the other one so we stopped it because we don’t want to waste.But we’re prepared to build thousands more should we need it. I don’t think we’re going to need it because it looks like we’re plateauing and maybe even, in many cases, coming down.In addition, we’ve ordered a total of 60 mobile decontamidation [sic]—-contamination systems. So the decontamination system from Battelle, in Ohio, is an incredible thing because it takes the masks, and up to 20 times you can decontaminate a mask. And I’ve been asking from the beginning: “Why can’t we sterilize and sanitize these masks?” And it turned out we can. And there was a great company in Ohio, they sent us some great equipment, and they’re doing that now.And now we’re going to have more than 33 million N95 masks per week will be cleaned, decontaminated, and it’ll be great. It’s something that, frankly, I think people should have thought of a long time ago.Five more flights landed today as part of the Project Air Bridge—our massive air lift operation to bring personal protective equipment into the United States, which has now delivered nearly half a million N95 masks, 370 million gloves, 25 million surgical masks, and 4.9 million gowns. So, we have millions of gowns, gloves, masks, all surgical equipment coming in should the states need it.Now, the states—the states are supposed to be buying their own stuff. But should they need it, we are ready to give them, because we’re building up our stockpile again like crazy.Remember, I—and you saw the stories. I inherited—this administration—Mike, myself, the whole administration, we inherited a stockpile where the cupboards were bare. There was nothing. And I say it and I’ll say it again: Just like we didn’t have ammunition, we didn’t have medical supplies, we didn’t have ventilators, we didn’t have a lot of things that should have been had. And you can read your own stories on that because you know what happened: They didn’t want to spend the money. But we did.To date, we’ve facilitated the supply of more than 38 million N95 masks nationwide. This week, we’ll be sending 2 million N95 masks to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Vice President will go into more detail. He’s got great detail on that, and I think it’s a pretty amazing story. We have a lot of masks already in stock, and we have more coming.We’re further expanding hospital surge capacity in key areas of the opening, and we have a portion of certain VA hospitals and non-veteran coronavirus patients, including at the East Orange, New Jersey Medical Center, as well as facilities in Manhattan and Brooklyn. They’re ready. They’re able. They’re beautiful. Hopefully, we won’t need too many of them because, frankly, we built everything that the governors wanted. And in many cases, it’s too much. We told them it was too much, but we wanted to err on the side of caution.The United States has now conducted nearly 3 million tests for the virus. Three million—the most of any nation. We are performing approximately 150,000 tests every single day and our rate of testing is especially high in areas hardest hit by the virus, if you look. And that’s really—and it has hit some areas—the virus—very, very hard. For example, per capita testing in New York is higher than the rest of the world.The NIH, CDC, and FDA are also currently validating several antibody tests that will allow us to determine whether someone has already had the virus and potentially become immune to infection. We’re looking at that. The antibody tests are going to be very interesting, over the next short while. A lot of things are being developed, as we speak.In the race to develop effective treatments, the drug company Gilead announced that its drug, remdesivir, has shown promising results—very promising—in compassionate use settings. In addition, the FDA has just granted emergency use authorization for a device that removes certain proteins from the bloodstream, possibly preventing a patient’s immune system from overreacting to the virus and damaging vital organs, which is a big problem.Furthermore, over the last seven days, my administration has deployed roughly 28 million doses of hydroxychloroquine from our National Stockpile. We have millions of doses that we bought and many people are using it all over the country. And just recently, a friend of mine told me he got better because of the use of that—that drug. So, who knows? And you combine it with Z-Pak, you combine it with Zinc—depending on your doctor’s recommendation. And it’s having some very good results, I’ll tell you.I think if anybody recommended it other than me, it would be used all over the place, to be honest with you. I think the fact that I recommended it, I probably set it back a lot. But it’s a lot of good things that are happening with it. A lot of good tests.Scientists are also pursuing a blood therapy known as convalescent plasma. Convalescent plasma. This therapy uses antibodies from the blood of recovered patients to treat those who are sick. And this is something that actually is a very old procedure, but it’s done in a very modern way.During this difficult time, we’re also working to ensure that the 2020 Census is completed safely and accuracy. We may be asking for an extension because, obviously, they can’t be doing very much right now. They wouldn’t even be allowed to do it. So, the Census, we’re going to be asking for a delay—a major delay, I think. How can you possibly be knocking on doors for a long period of time now?The Census Bureau recently made the decision to temporarily suspend its field operation data-collection activities to help stop the spread. In addition, while millions of Americans continue to complete their questionnaire online, the Census Bureau has asked Congress for a 120 extension. I don’t know that you even have to ask them. This is called “an act of God.” This is called a—a situation that has to be—they have to give in. I think 120 days isn’t nearly enough.My administration is also taking bold action to help American workers. On Friday, Americans began receiving the cash payments authorized by a historic $2 trillion relief bill.By the end of the week, nearly 80 million Americans will receive a total of $147 billion. And from what the Secretary of the Treasury tells me, that’s very much on time and going very nicely. He’ll be speaking in a moment. And payments—these payments go directly into the banks and the bank accounts of these people. Millions of additional payments will follow. The typical family of four will receive $3,400. That’s for a family of four. That’s something.Additionally, through our Paycheck Protection Program –which is a tremendous success, and they should extend it and increase it. This has been a tremendous success. So successful that the banks are taking a little bit longer to distribute the money, but it’s going rapidly.We’ve now processed over $200 billion in loans to help small businesses retain their workers. Now we urgently need lawmakers to set aside the partisan agendas and to replenish this program with new funds because it’s really something that has been an incredible success. And they need more money to keep it going to take care of these business and keep them—keep them open.I want to thank the many governors, health professionals, scientists, and business leaders for their incredible hard work and input over the past month, and even long beyond a month, Mike, I would say. You know, we’ve been working together with a lot of for, it seems like, forever.I’ve been having many discussions with my team and top experts, and we’re very close to completing a plan to open our country, hopefully even ahead of schedule. And that’s so important.We will soon finalize new and very important guidelines to give governors the information they need to start safely opening their states. My administration’s plan and corresponding guidelines will give the American people the confidence they need to begin returning to normal life. That’s what we want. We want to have our country open. We want to return to normal life. Our country is going to be open, and it’s going to be successfully opened. And we’ll be explaining over a very short number of days exactly what is going to be.We’ve also, as you probably heard, developed a committee. We’re actually calling it a number of committees with the most prominent people in the country, the most successful people in the various fields. And we’ll be announcing them tomorrow.This weekend, the United States also helped facilitate an unprecedented agreement among the 23 nations of OPEC Plus—that’s OPEC plus additional energy-producing nations—representing many of the world’s largest oil-producing countries to stabilize oil markets. And we have, in fact—and I think you’ve seen a big stabilization over the last couple of days.Together, countries around the world will cut oil production by approximately 20 million barrels. People are saying 10 million, but we think that the number that they’ll actually hit is going to be closer to 20 million barrels a day. And that will help a lot with saving jobs all over Texas and Oklahoma and North Dakota and many of other—other of our big energy states.This historic action will help nearly 11 million American workers who are supported by the U.S. oil and gas industry. It’s a very monumental agreement. I want to thank Saudi Arabia and the King of Saudi Arabia, the Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia—both. I want to thank President Putin of Russia. And I want to thank a very good friend of mine—a man who’s become a friend of mine: The President of Mexico showed great flexibility. President López Obrador. He showed great flexibility and—and tremendous intelligence doing what he did. It was not that easy for him. And I want to thank Mexico and the president. This is a very historic deal. Very historic. So we’ll see how it all goes.In this time and challenge—and we are certainly in a time probably like we haven’t been in many, many decades—we are strengthened and sustained by the bonds of love and loyalty that unite all Americans. I’m so proud of the American people.Everywhere you look, you see the patriotism of our people shining through and the courage of our doctors and nurses on the frontlines, and the dedication of our food supply workers, and in the commitment of every citizen to achieving victory over the virus. That’s what’s going to happen. It’s going to happen sooner than people think. And we’re going to be smart about it. Very, very smart about it. We’re going to be safe about it. We’re going to be listening also to the great doctors and medical professionals.Together, we’re beating back the invisible enemy and we’re paving the way for great resurgence. Really, a great resurgence for American prosperity. Our country wants to go back. They want to go back to work. They’re going to go back safely, and that’s what we want.I’d like now to ask Vice President Pence to say a few words, followed by Dr. Fauci and Dr. Birx. I think before we—before we do this—because I know there’s an emergency where they want Steve to come. So what I’ll do is I’ll ask Steve to come up—Secretary of the Treasury. You can talk a little bit and then maybe take a couple of questions about what’s happening. Tell them the success we’re having.Thank you very much.SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Thank you, Mr. President and Mr. Vice President. As you announced, we are very pleased that we are ahead of schedule on delivering the economic impact payments. These are what was known as the checks in the mail that we want to deliver in direct—direct deposit.This is ahead of schedule. We started processing those last Friday. We expect that over 80 million hardworking Americans will get the direct deposit by this Wednesday. And we know how important that is to all of those hardworking Americans, many of which are at home, not working at the moment.If you do not receive them by Wednesday—on Wednesday, we will be launching at IRS.gov. Click on IRS.gov, go to “Get Your Payment.” If you filed a tax return in 2018 and ’19—or ’19—have that information available. You’ll be able to ID yourself, you’ll be able to put in your direct deposit information, and within several days, we will automatically deposit the money into your account. We want to do as much of this electronically as we can. It’s very important in this day and age. It’s more secure, and you don’t have to go to the bank.If you’re a Social Security beneficiary, you do not need to do anything. You will get a direct deposit. If you have not filed and did not need to file a 2018 and ‘19 return, you can go to IRS.gov now and enter your information and authenticate yourself. So again, we are very pleased that that is ahead of schedule.I’d also like to announce the progress we’re making on the new SBA program, the PPP. Let me just remind everybody: This is a brand-new program that is now one week old.We have distributed and confirmed $230 billion of loans to over 4,600 lenders participating. That is multiples and multiples of anything that the SBA has ever done in—in one year, before. And I especially want to thank the broad-based community banks that are participating. Again, over 4,600 banks.If you haven’t had your loan processed, you will get it processed this week. As the President said, we’ve gone back to Congress and asked them for more money to make sure that every business has access to this.Let me also comment for the states. We are distributing out half the money, this week, to the states. That’s a week ahead of time. And we’ll deliver the other half of the money to the states next week.And then let me just finally comment, we’ve been very—working very closely with the Federal Reserve. Last week, we announced expanded facilities and new facilities that total $2.3 trillion of liquidity. And in particular, I’d just like to highlight a Main Street lending facility that will be for companies between one worker and 10,000 people—so mid-sized businesses—and also, a municipal facility for states and local governments to be able to access funds given the shortages that they have.So with that, I’m happy to answer any questionsTHE PRESIDENT: You have any questions for Steve, please?Q: Secretary Mnuchin, thank you, sir. Both Speaker Pelosi and Minority Leader Schumer have said that they’re in negotiations with you right now on additional funding for these small-business loans, for that package. Leader McConnell, though, has said that nothing should be added to the package. They should just be specific to small-business loans. What is the opinion of your administration? Should there be some sort of horse-trading here or should it just be small business loans?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Well, the President’s view and the Vice President’s and my view is this was a bipartisan program. This SBA program, it wasn’t a Republican program, it wasn’t a Democrat program; it was a bipartisan program. We’ve committed to small businesses. We should top up that program now. I know the Democrats want to talk about more money for hospitals and states. Right now, we’re just sending the money out to the hospitals and states. They haven’t come close to using that money. And I know the President and Vice Presidents have said once we get the SBA done, we can go into another funding bill.The President has talked about potentially adding infrastructure and other things. We think there is a likelihood we will need more money, and we will—we will sit down and try to get a bipartisan bill. But this is important we deliver on small businesses. Fifty percent of the people work for small businesses.Q: Thank you, sir.Q: What’s the emergency that the President said you had to go for? The President said you had an emergency meeting —THE PRESIDENT: Negotiation.Q: Over this bill?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Yeah, well—or because we don’t want to run out of money. We’ve used about $220 billion of the $350 billion. We don’t want to run out of that money. We don’t want to create panics that people won’t get it. So that’s why we want to—we want to top that up, and we’ve asked for another $250 billion for that program.And again, let me just remind you, every dollar we spend in this program, we save a dollar of unemployment insurance. So even though we’re asking for $250 billion, it really won’t cost that much.Q: Could I follow up?Q: What are your—do you have concerns about lifting the guidelines too soon? And what’s the economic impact? I understand the economic argument for getting people back to work, obviously. But what’s the economic risk of lifting them too early and seeing then a spike in cases again?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Well, of course there’s economic risks in both directions. We reviewed with the President today a very broad list of over 100 business people that are going to help advise the President on what needs to be done to reopen the economy.We want to make sure—and again, the combination of economic impact payments, small-business payments, enhanced unemployment insurance—the President made very clear, we want to make sure that hardworking Americans have liquidity while we wait to reopen the government.Q: So do you believe the government should be re-—or that the country, excuse me, should be reopened on May 1?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: I’ve had discussions with the President. I know he’s considering it, and I believe he’s going to make a decision later in the week.THE PRESIDENT: We have to do—everything has to be safe. We want safe.Q: What is your advice to the President?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: My advice is: As soon as it’s ready to open and based upon the medical professionals, and—and again, we’re working very closely with the President and outside business leaders to develop a plan.Q: I just wonder—I wanted to ask you, Mr. President, what you think—what—if you could sketch for us what reopening the economy looks like. Do you think it’s going to be everything open? Or do you think —THE PRESIDENT: Well, I’ll be doing that over the next few days because we’ll probably be making a statement about that and exactly what it looks like.I know what that looks like, but I also want to get the advice, in a sense. We have some of the—the biggest from every business on this council. We’re actually setting up a number of different councils or committees, I guess you could call them. And we have a lot of smart people. I think that they will give us some also good advice. But, no, we want to be very, very safe. At the same time, we got to get our country open.Q: Yeah, I understand that, Mr. President. Do you think there is a possibility then that what you do is you open it incrementally? Do you think people will go back to restaurants, to concerts, the cinema?THE PRESIDENT: I do think so. Eventually, they will. Yeah.Q: And let me ask one final —THE PRESIDENT: I think eventually theywill do that. And I think we’re going to—boom—I think we’re going to—I think it’s going to go quickly. Our people want to get back to work, and I think there’s a pent-up demand like there hasn’t been in a long time.And that’s why—and that’s why you see the stock market—I mean, to think that the stock market is at the level it is right now, with all that this world and this country has gone. And look at the European Union, how badly decimated they’ve been. Look at other countries. Look at China, by the way. I’ve seen the numbers. Look at China. Look at how these countries have been just decimated by this.And to think that the stock market is at this tremendously high number. Not that much—you know, it was looking a little bleak for a while, but it—it hit a certain point and then started going up. I think that’s a great tribute to the fact that there’s a demand.Yeah.Q: Mr. President, thank you, sir. In regards to some of your tweets earlier today, and I think it was Steve’s question, my question to you is: What provision in the Constitution gives the President the power to open or close state economies? And then —THE PRESIDENT: Numerous provisions. We’ll give you a legal brief if you want.Q: And then—we’ll be looking forward to that, sir. But following up: What happens if you say, for instance, “We want states to reopen but California or New York do not open”? What would you do then?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I think everybody wants to open. I mean, I guess, you know, that could happen, but I don’t think that would happen.Go ahead please.Q: It’s been states that have closed, ordered schools closed. It’s been states that have ordered businesses like restaurants and bars closed.THE PRESIDENT: That’s because I let that happen because I would have preferred that. I let that happen. But if I wanted to, I could have closed it up. But I let that happen and I like the way they’ve done it. And the seven that remained really in sort of a semi-lockdown—if you look at those states, they’ve really done a very good job. They’re very much different from a New York or from other places where they’ve been hit very hard.Q: So you’re prepared then to bigfoot states and say, “I order you to open your schools, I order to force kids to be able to go”?THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please. Yeah.Q: Yes, Mr. President. Following up on that, there are two consortiums of states today—California, Oregon, and Washington on the West Coast; Northeastern states—totally representing about 100 million people, who have said they’re going to cooperate and decide when to reopen those states.THE PRESIDENT: Well, they can decide, but —Q: Does that undermine what you’re trying to do?THE PRESIDENT: No, not at all. Let me just tell you—very simple. I’m going to put it very simply: The President of the United States has the authority to do what the President has the authority to do, which is very powerful. The President of the United States calls the shots.If we weren’t here for the states, you would have had a problem in this country like you’ve never seen before. We were here to back them up. And we’re backing—and we’ve more than backed them up. We did a job that nobody ever thought was possible. It’s a decision for the President of the United States.Now, with that being said, we’re going to work with the states because it’s very important. You have local governments, they’re pinpointed. It’s really—you talk about—it’s like a microchip. They are pinpointed. We have local government that hopefully will do a good job. And if they don’t do a good job, I’d step in so fast. But no, they can’t do anything without the approval of the President of the United States.Q: But, Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: So if some states refuse to reopen and you order them to, the 10th Amendment of the Constitution says all powers that don’t reside in the President or Congress reside in the states. How do you overcome that?THE PRESIDENT: Well, if some states refuse to open, I would be—I would like to see that person run for election. They’re going to open. They’re going to all open.Q: So that’s a valid (inaudible).THE PRESIDENT: I think that’s something that’s not going to happen. They want to open. They have to open. They have to get open. Every one of those states, the people want to go and they want to —Now, some will be—are in a different situation. You have—I won’t name states now, but I will over the next two or three days. I’m going to be very specific. But you have some states where this is not the kind of a problem than it is in New York or Louisiana or Michigan or other places that got hit very hard. Illinois got hit very hard. But all states want to open and they want to open as soon as possible. But they want to open safely and so do I.Yeah, please.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Today, the French President Emmanuel Macron said that he will keep the shutdown in France until the middle of May. Does that mean that the U.S. will keep the ban from flights from —THE PRESIDENT: No, France got hit very hard. France got hit very hard. And again, he has to do what he has to do. He’s a friend of mine. But France—Spain has just been decimated. You look at what’s happened in Italy, it’s a very well-known fact, what happened in Italy. No, they were hit very hard.Q: Question for Secretary Mnuchin: Has everybody that you would like to have—the 100 business people on the Economic Council—have they all been invited already? Have they all agreed to be —SECRETARY MNUCHIN: They ha-—they haven’t been invited yet. We’ve just reviewed the names with the President —THE PRESIDENT: It’s a group.SECRETARY MNUCHIN:—today, for him to sign off on.Q: And are they from all sectors? Energy —SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Yes, there’s—basically, there’s verticals. So every single area of the economy we wanted to be represented.Q: Great. One other thing. Is there anything else that needs to be done to work on industry—oil industry jobs—to save oil industry jobs after the deal this past weekend?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Well, I think there’s always things. So we’re working with Larry Kudlow. I mean, we have —Q: Anything specifically that needs to be done?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: We have—we have economic plans for every single part of the economy. Obviously, in the case of the oil industry, they’ve been hit especially hard because you’ve had both the supply issue and you’ve had the demand issue.Q: Have you—have you figured out the bailout money for the airlines, with the allocations for the airlines?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: So I’m pleased to say we’ve worked very hard. I think, as you probably have seen, we’ve put out a press release that we have now had discussions with almost all the airlines. I’ve personally had discussions with all the major airlines’ CEOs. We specifically created an exception for small airlines that we could process very quickly. And I think you’ll see, very quickly, decisions coming out. I’m very pleased with the discussions we’ve had.THE PRESIDENT: We’ve had very good dis-—really just good discussions.Q: Mr. Secretary?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Yes.Q: Do you still see a need for a phase four stimulus? Or is this push to reopen —THE PRESIDENT: Steve, I just want to say we have had —Q:—the economy in lieu of that?THE PRESIDENT:—discussions—wait, excuse me. One second, please. We’ve had very good discussions with the airlines. Very good discussions.Q: And is it possible to reopen the economy on May the 1st?THE PRESIDENT: I don’t want to say that. You’ll be hearing over the next few days.Q: Mr. President —Q: Is phase four going to be later than that, Mr. President?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Let me—let me just comment—I’m going to answer your question.Q: Mr. Secretary, do you see a need for a phase four? Or is this push in lieu of another stimulus?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Okay. So again, let me just comment—I mean, Congress, on a bipartisan basis, approved an unprecedented amount of money to help American workers and American business because it was no fault of their own that business was closed down. We had been very diligently executing on that. You know, everybody said it was going to take months to get people money. We are executing very quickly. We created a whole new SBA program in a week.Our job right now is to execute the $2.3 billion, which we can add several trillion dollars with the Fed.The one area we are particularly concerned about is the Small Business program. Quite frankly, it’s even more incredibly popular and successful than we anticipated. So the President wants to be very clear: We have money for that. And once we get done with that, we will review with the President. If there is more money that needs to be—to support this economy, to support hardworking Americans—we will work with Congress to get that in time.THE PRESIDENT: And, Steve, do you want to talk about phase four?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: So, phase four, the President has talked about infrastructure for a long period of time. We’ve talked about—to the extent that the hospitals need more money because of the medical issues, we’ll monitor that. We want to make sure there are incentives for restaurants, entertainment—people to get back to those types of things. So we’ll be looking at, very specifically, provisions to stimulate parts of the economy. Some of them may be money issues. Some of them may be regulatory issues.Q: Mr. President, just to clarify your understanding of your authority vis-à-vis governors—just to be very specific: For instance, if a governor issued a stay-at-home order —THE PRESIDENT: When you say “my authority”—the President’s authority. Not mine, because it’s not me.Q: If I could just ask the question —THE PRESIDENT: This is—when somebody is the President of the United States, the authority is total, and that’s the way it’s got to be.Q: It’s total? Your authority is total?THE PRESIDENT: It’s total. It’s total.Q: Your authority is total?THE PRESIDENT: And the governors know that.Q: So if a governor —THE PRESIDENT: The governors know that. No, you have —Q: If a governor issues a stay-at-home order, you —THE PRESIDENT:—a couple of bands of—excuse me. Excuse me. You have a couple —Q: Could you rescind that? Could you rescind that order?THE PRESIDENT: You have a couple of bands of Democrat governors, but they will agree to it. They will agree to it.Q: What if it was a Republican governor?THE PRESIDENT: But the authority of the President of the United States, having to do with the subject we’re talking about, is total.Yeah, please, go ahead.Q: Mr. President, one of the things you —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: One of the things you—one of the things you spoke—we saw in your video about was the travel ban from Europe. As part of reopening America, do you want to reopen the borders so that people from Europe, from the UK —THE PRESIDENT: At the right time.Q: How soon do you think we are from —THE PRESIDENT: And a very good question, actually.Well, I’m going to have to take a look. I wouldn’t say Italy is doing great right now, and I wouldn’t say Spain is doing great right now. And we just heard that France is extending its stay-inside order, right? Their stay—they’ve extended it—I just see that—and, I think, for a short period of time.But no, when they’re back. We want to do it very quickly, but we want to make sure everything is good.No, right now we have a very —Q: Weeks, months?THE PRESIDENT: Right now we have a very strong ban. We’re going to keep it that way until they heal.Q: Weeks, months? What would you —THE PRESIDENT: Well, I can’t tell you that. I can’t tell you that. I have to see: How are they doing? I mean, France just went for another two days—for another two weeks. We have to see.Jon.Q: So Dr. Fauci said that you took his advice on the question of mitigation. He made the recommendation. You accepted it. You put into place. As you make this next decision, which, as you have said —THE PRESIDENT: Well, I’m not sure who—Jon, I’m not sure who really gave me advice on the ban. I think I took —Q: No, not on the ban. I’m talking about the mitigation.THE PRESIDENT: I think I took my own advice on the ban. I don’t know.Q:—the social—the social distancing, I’m talking about. The shutting down.THE PRESIDENT: Okay.Q: Not of travel, but of activity. So my question is: As you make this next decision, which you have said may be the most difficult or important decision of your presidency, will you assure the American people that you will again take the advice of the doctors—of Dr. Fauci, of Dr. Birx? Will you take the advice of the health experts before you do that?THE PRESIDENT: I will and many other people also. But I will absolutely take their advice.Q: But would you go against them?THE PRESIDENT: Please go ahead.Q: Yes, Mr. —Q: Would you go against their recommendation? If they say you need another 15 or 30 days, would you —THE PRESIDENT: I don’t think it would be likely because I think we’re not very far from being on the same page.Please.Q: Yes, Mr. President, one thing that Governor Cuomo said today is that states do not have the capacity to do the mass COVID-19 testing ahead of a reopening as —THE PRESIDENT: Well, they have to do it. Look, they’re supposed to be doing it.Q: He says he can’t purchase the diagnostic tests or equipment —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, I know. I know.Q:—and needs federal help. So will the states get that?THE PRESIDENT: Well, they—they may need help, but —Q: Will they get it?THE PRESIDENT: But they’re there. They’re on ground. They’ve got local mayors, local representatives. They have people that do it.Q: But he needs the supplies.THE PRESIDENT: And what we did last time is unprecedented. We literally rebuilt tests. We—we rebuilt a whole industry because we inherited nothing. What we inherited from the previous administration was totally broken, which somebody should eventually say. Not only were the cupboards bare, as I say, but we inherited broken testing. Now we have great testing.I just left the top executives at Abbott. Who would have thought that would have happened, where they have such a great test as that?And, in fact, what I’ll do—I think, unless you have any further questions for the Secretary of the Treasury—do you have anybody for Steve? Anybody?Q: Mr. Secretary Mnuchin —THE PRESIDENT: Is that for the Secretary of the Treasury or for me?Q: For Secretary Mnuchin, yeah. Yes, sir.THE PRESIDENT: Because if it’s for me, we can wait.Q: It’s for Secretary Mnuchin.THE PRESIDENT: We have to get him back to work, okay?Q: Yes, sir. For Secretary Mnuchin, a question —SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Yes.Q:—from one of my colleagues who’s not able to be in the room. They’re curious about the SBA rule that prevents small casinos from getting some of this relief. Is that something that you’re taking a look at? Is there going to be a change to the —SECRETARY MNUCHIN: So, no—not small casinos, but there are such things as small taverns and restaurants that have literally, you know, small gaming things. And we are coming out with some additional guidance on that. But I want to be clear: It’s not small casinos.Q: Thank you, sir.Q: Secretary Mnuchin?Q: Secretary?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Yes.Q: There was a letter that some House Republicans sent this weekend, about the liquidity for a mortgage servicers.SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Yes.Q: Are—can you explain what you’re looking at on that front?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Sure. So I think I commented on this a week or so ago. We had a subcommittee task force at FSOC that specifically studied this issue. We have all the appropriate people on it. Ginnie Mae has automatically taken some action. We’ve had conversations with the FHFA as to what they’re going to do for Fannie and Freddie. And we’ve said that to the extent they need certain authorities from the Treasury, we will accommodate that.So we’re—we’re very aware of the issue. Quite frankly, we’ve been studying this issue way before COVID and had concerns about some of these non-bank servicers not being well capitalized. But we’re going to—we’re going to make sure that the market functions properly.Q: Thank you, sir. We have seen, in a number of these relief bills, that Democrats and Republicans have been able to push forward different non-coronavirus-specific funding priorities. Are you trying to keep funding specific to coronavirus? And then, if there are going to be other additions—for instance, a change to labor rules is something that many on the left wanted. Some of the right are wondering if they should also—if you should also be pushing for, you know, their preferred add-ons.SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Well, I think our expectation has always been this is COVID related. Some people have a rather broad view of what “COVID related” is, because it has impacted almost every single business. I mean, I think, we’ve—the President has talked about the Kennedy Center, which is a good institution. Obviously, that was not the major priority in the bill, but they were hit with COVID related.So—but, no, the President has instructed we want to be very specific in the next bill. It’s COVID-related items.Q: It’s been reported —THE PRESIDENT: Well, we didn’t want to do the Kennedy Center, just so you understand. And that that was done—the Democrats wanted it in. We didn’t want that, but they wanted it in. And we had to agree in order to get something done for the workers. But we want this to be for the workers and for companies that employ the workers. That’s what we’re looking for. We’re not looking for extraneous nonsense.Q: It’s been reported that you argued, at the time the China ban was being discussed, that that was too disruptive to the global economy. Is that accurate?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Let me be clear: I had nothing to do with the China ban. I wasn’t on the task force at the time. I’m not even sure I was—I think I was traveling at the time. But I never had any—I was not part—I did become very active, and after the China ban, but that report in the New York Times was not accurate.Q: You did not weigh in beforehand?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: I was not part of the task force at that time, and I was—I was not involved. As a matter of fact, I think I may have been traveling.Q: Secretary Mnuchin, there’s a proposal made by Senator Hawley to get direct payments to employers to pay people who have been laid off and to keep people on payroll. Does the administration support that proposal?SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Well, again, that is the PPP. The PPP is basically sending money to small business—50 percent of American workers—to keep those people paid. And it’s the most efficient way. Every dollar, as I said, we do through that, it’s one less dollar of unemployment. And more importantly, we want those people to have—be associated with the business. So as soon as the President is ready to open up the economy, those businesses are together. We don’t want those businesses to fall apart. That’s why this is such a successful program, and we want Congress to put more money in.THE PRESIDENT: But are you talking about unemployment? You’re talking about the unemployment?Q: (Inaudible) Senator Hawley.THE PRESIDENT: Sending it indirectly to the states? We would have preferred that it was sent directly to the people. The Democrats wanted it to be sent through the unemployment system. And, you know, I’ve talked to you about it: We have 40-year-old equipment in many of those systems. They’re run by the state. But I’m hearing they’re getting the money out anyway.SECRETARY MNUCHIN: So, some—some of them are, and some of the states aren’t, and we encourage—you know, we’re working with the states to try to update their computers, but it’s a—it’s a long haul.THE PRESIDENT: Okay? Thank you, Steve.SECRETARY MNUCHIN: Thank you. Thank you, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Phase four, Steve. Phase four. Come on, Steve.Q: A quick question about something you just said. You said, “When someone is President of the United States, their authority is total.” That is not true. Who—who told you that?THE PRESIDENT: Okay. So you know what we’re going to do? We’re going to write up papers on this. It’s not going to be necessary, because the governors need us one way or the other, because ultimately it comes with the federal government. That being said, we’re getting along very well with the governors, and I feel very certain that there won’t be a problem.Yeah, please. Go ahead.Q: Has any governor agreed that you have the authority to decide when their state opens back up?THE PRESIDENT: I haven’t asked anybody because I don’t—you know why?Q: Because no one has—no one has said that.THE PRESIDENT: Because I don’t have to.Go ahead, please.Q: But who told you the President has the total authority?THE PRESIDENT: Enough. Please.Q: You mentioned the Vice President’s call with the governors today. Governor Hogan of Maryland has urged your administration to ask Congress for $500 billion to help stabilize budgetary shortfalls created by coronavirus.THE PRESIDENT: It’s nice of Governor Hogan, very much. We appreciate Governor Hogan’s statement.Q: Governor Cuomo said the CARES Act ignored state government shortfalls.THE PRESIDENT: Cuomo.Q: Do you support that request?THE PRESIDENT: Which one? What did he say?Q: He said the CARES Act ignored the budgetary shortfalls.THE PRESIDENT: Well, they’re looking at things in phase four, where they have—you know, where they talk about states, and they’re also talking about hospitals. They’re talking about states who have been battered, and they’re also talking about hospitals. And we’re certainly willing to look at that.Q: Will you urge Congress on their behalf?THE PRESIDENT: You know, we’ll see what we all come back with. But they are talking about states and they’re talking about hospitals.OAN.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. The Governor of Michigan, Gretchen Whitmer, has on Thursday signed an executive order banning the sale of non-essential goods. If other states follow —THE PRESIDENT: The sale of what?Q: Non-essential goods. She has banned the sale of non-essential goods. Many are calling this draconian, unconstitutional. As President, do you think that if other states were to follow her example in the coming weeks, that the federal government should intervene?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t think that’s going to happen. I think it’s very extreme. But she’s doing it, and I think it’s going to be over a long way before we have to start thinking about it too much. It is strong. It’s a very strong position to take. But they’re making a lot of progress in Michigan, so let’s see how it all works.Q: What is the status of the funding for the World Health Organization?THE PRESIDENT: We’re going to be talking about that very soon. I’m getting a full report. I’m not happy with the World Health Organization. I’m not happy with the World Trade Organization either. We’ve been ripped off by everybody.And we have—this country, for so many years, has been ripped off by everybody, whether it’s a World Health or World Trade. And they’re like—I call them the “Bobbsey Twins.” They’d look at our country—for years and years, we had people that did nothing about it. We’re doing a lot about it. So we’ll have a report.And we’ll also—we’re also talking about the World Trade Organization. But we’ve made a lot of progress there. We’re now winning cases for the first time, because they know I’ll leave if we don’t get treated fairly.This country—our country—was at a point where we rarely, if ever, won the lawsuits within the World Trade Organization. But now we’re winning a lot of them, because they know I’m not—I’m not playing games. We will pull out if we have to. We just won a 7-billion-dollar lawsuit, which was very nice.Q: Do you expect a decision this week on cutting funding for the WHO?THE PRESIDENT: Uh, yeah. I would say, by the end of the week, I’m going to make a decision on that. Yeah. There’s a lot of—right now, there’s a lot of things happening.Q: On China—why are there no consequences for China, for the misinformation that they shared?THE PRESIDENT: How do you know there are no consequences?Q: Because you’ve said. Well, you’ve been asked, and it appear that there were no —THE PRESIDENT: How do you know there are no consequences?Q: What are the consequences, Mr. President, for the misinformation —THE PRESIDENT: I wouldn’t tell you. China will find out. Why would I tell you?Q: But people are concerned that they stonewalled, that they gave misinformation —THE PRESIDENT: No, you started off by saying, “Why are there no consequences?”Q: Because you’ve been asked this a few times, so I’m following up on your response. Why are there no consequences for China?THE PRESIDENT: How do you know there are no consequences?Q: Because we’ve asked you —THE PRESIDENT: You’re going to find out.Q: —and you’ve said—you’ve said that didn’t want to have an consequences because you suggested trade.THE PRESIDENT: I wouldn’t tell you. You’d probably be the last person on Earth I’d tell.Q: So you’re saying there will be consequences?THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead. Uh, yeah, please.Q: Mr. President—actually, this is a question for Mr. Vice President. Do you agree with the President’s statement and his understanding of federalism, that his power is total—like in the way he described it? Is there anything you’d like to add or any context you’d like to add to the way he was discussing that?THE VICE PRESIDENT: I support the President’s leadership under the national emergency declaration that he signed.And we’re standing before you today, the first time in American history, when all 50 states have issued emergency declarations, and the territories. This is an unprecedented time in the life of the nation.And fortunately, as the President has reflected and our health experts will continue to reflect, because the American people have heeded the President’s Coronavirus Guidelines for America; because state governors have taken those and implemented them, even in states where there was not a significant outbreak; and implemented additional measures as we provided them with data about cases and best practices—we’re making real progress as a country.Q: But it sounds like you think his power is a little bit more circumscribed than totally.THE PRESIDENT: Well, make no mistake about it: In the long history of this country, the authority of the President of the United States during national emergencies is unquestionably plenary. And you can look back through times of war and other national emergencies. And as the President said, we’ll happily brief that.But in the days ahead, what the President has charged us to do is to work with our health experts. We’re going to bring together an extraordinary group of American business leaders to counsel the President. And then, working with the CDC, we’re going to produce new guidelines, based upon the data, for every state and territory in this nation. We’re going to give them guidance. And, as the President has indicated, we’ll continue to respect the leadership and partnership that we forge with every governor in America.But this is an unprecedented time. But I have to tell you: When you look at the fact—despite the heartbreaking loss of more than 22,000 Americans—when you look at the fact of what the health experts told us this could be, I think I only can feel a sense of gratitude to the American people, gratitude to the extraordinary team that has counseled this President, the steps that President Trump has taken, the policies that governors have implemented all across America.I mean, we were discussing today, at the task force, that when you look at the European Union as a whole, they have nearly three times the mortality rate that the United States of America has today. And that is a tribute to our extraordinary healthcare workers, their dedication, their tireless work. But it’s also a tribute to the fact that the American people put into practice the mitigation efforts that the President counseled the nation to do on the advice of our best scientists, now more than a month ago, and our hospitals were not overwhelmed and are not overwhelmed at this hour.And I have to tell you that standing here today, I couldn’t be more proud to stand alongside this President and to be a part of this team that has served the American people during this challenging hour.And I just say to you: To every American looking on, as we see the numbers leveling and maybe even beginning to go down, I just encourage you to keep doing what you’re doing. Because of the sacrifices that Americans and American families have made through these mitigation efforts, you’re saving lives and you’re seeing our nation through this time.THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.Q: Sir, did the states tell you—you’ve been talking to the governors quite a bit—did those coalitions of states on the West Coast and in the Northeast, did they tell you what they are going to be announcing before they announce it?THE VICE PRESIDENT: Governor Phil Murphy and the governor of Connecticut expressed today that they were going to be speaking on a—and discussing on a regional basis what their recommendations would be. And we assured them today —Q: Did they alert the White House about that, though, sir?THE VICE PRESIDENT: We assured them today on our conference call with, I think, 48 governors that were with us today for the better part of an hour and a half—we told them that what the President would be producing—has directed to be produced are additional guidelines for the states, certified by the CDC, that would inform those governors and local communities and mayors about the best way forward, based on the unique circumstances that those states and those communities are facing.I think what’s clear is the American people have seen the experience in Washington State, where this really all began for us; and in California; and now, the extraordinary challenges in the Greater New York City area, including New Jersey and Connecticut; the challenges in New Orleans and Louisiana and Detroit, still Chicago, parts of Houston.But they’re also seeing that, in each one of those cases, that the mitigation efforts are truly working. And so we’ll—we’ll work with those—we’ll work with those states. And in some cases, it’ll make perfect sense for them to work together on a regional basis.Q: Any idea why they didn’t let you know ahead of time what they were planning?THE PRESIDENT: Well, you don’t know that. You don’t know that.THE VICE PRESIDENT: But—but the President—the President will be —Q: (Inaudible.)THE PRESIDENT: You don’t know that. I’m sorry.THE VICE PRESIDENT: I’m sorry, I didn’t hear your question.Q: Mr. President, can you tell us? Did they let you know?THE PRESIDENT: You don’t know that. No, you made a statement. You don’t know that.THE VICE PRESIDENT: I didn’t hear your—I didn’t hear your statement. I’m sorry.THE PRESIDENT: And we would—and we would like to have their cooperation. And we are going to have their cooperation. They will cooperate perfectly. Watch.THE VICE PRESIDENT: I—and let me just affirm what the President said. We heard it again today in what I think was our ninth conference call with governors is: I think every American would be proud to see the partnership that this President has forged with governors across the country. I mean, it is an extraordinary statement.And you’ll see some data when Admiral Polowczyk gets up in just a few moments, but the flow of resources from around the world that we’ve moved into areas that have faced challenges—I mean, this President has directed us to ensure that every state has what they need, when they need it. And the spirit that I heard again from Republicans and Democrat governors today was reflective of that partnership.And as we move forward to the President’s goal of reopening America, we expect the same kind of partnership in the interest of the nation.THE PRESIDENT: All right, go ahead, with the face mask. Go ahead.Q: Sir, if you can hear me through the mask —THE PRESIDENT: Barely.Q: Can—can you —THE PRESIDENT: I hear you well, actually.Q:—the—the District of Columbia argues that they were shortchanged in the most recent funding bill because they were treated as a territory instead of as a state. Will that be made right in phase four?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we’re looking at that certainly. I heard that complaint, but the mayor seems to be very happy with everything we’ve done.THE VICE PRESIDENT: She was on today.THE PRESIDENT: I mean, she’s actually—and she was on today, saying very good things.Okay, yeah. Go ahead in the back.Q: Mr. President, you talked about this being the most difficult decision that you are going to have to take about whether to reopen the economy. I wonder how much it weighs on your mind the thought that if there is a second wave, you’ve reopened the economy and you might have to shut things down again.THE PRESIDENT: It does. And I hope that won’t happen. I certainly hope that won’t happen, but it does weigh on my mind.Okay, in the back, go ahead. You had one. Go ahead.Q: Mr. President?THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: Thank you. Okay, thank you. A question for one of my colleagues who wasn’t able to be here. China deployed an aircraft carrier into the South China Chi [sic]—South China Sea this weekend, amid claims by Chinese state media that COVID has reduced U.S. military readiness in the region. What kind of responses are you thinking of? Will you have a response to this action?THE PRESIDENT: China has their own difficulties. We have a relationship with China that—we’re not happy with certain things that happened over the last period of time, as you know, and I’ve been very explicit on that. But we know all about that.And, no, China is—we’ve seen what they did. We’ve seen many other things that they’ve done, both pro and con. And we’ll be just fine.Q: On Abbott, you said something earlier, where you said that you’re putting together the economic task force and that you thought that the recommendations were happening earlier than expected. Did you mean to suggest that it could be before May 1st that you start recommending that states open?THE PRESIDENT: I don’t want to say that, but we’re going to be putting out guidelines and recommendations fairly quickly. In a few days.Q: You’re not ruling out that it would be before?THE PRESIDENT: I’m not going to say. But, look, certain states are doing very well. Certain big parts of the country are doing very well. They’re doing, really, very well. And so we’re going to be putting out recommendations and guidelines very soon.Steve?Q: And would these new guidelines be—would they fit each area or would they be a uniform set of guidelines?THE PRESIDENT: Well, you’re going to see. I—I don’t want to tell you now, but right now we have a very strong indication that we know, pretty much—we have some good ideas.I also do want to get—I want to have—we’ll have video conference or at least a conference call with a lot of very good people, having to do with certain fields, whether it’s energy or whether it’s entertainment and restaurants, et cetera, et cetera.We have to get people back into restaurants. We have to do what we have to do. Whether it’s deductibility or not, we’ll see, but it should be deductibility. You’ll get them back so fast. I mean, they used to have deductibility. The restaurant business, it—it was one of the hot businesses. And then they ended it a long time ago, many years ago. But we may need that to get people back into the restaurants.Please.Q: Yeah. Michelle Obama, today, got behind mail-in voting nationwide as a possible solution to the—on states. She said it shouldn’t be a partisan issue. Have your advisors told you that that could save lives? And (inaudible)?THE PRESIDENT: Absentee ballot, are you talking about? Absentee ballot?Q: Yeah, and on a massive scale because of the coronavirus.THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t know what she did. I mean, I didn’t see that. When did that happen? Today?Q: Yeah, she’s part of—that’s a nonpartisan group.THE PRESIDENT: Well, I wish her luck. I wish her a lot of luck.Please, go ahead.Q: On Abbott Labs, you said you had long —Q: Yes, Mr. President. There’s a little bit of confusion about your phone calls yesterday with President Putin. The Kremlin is saying that you discussed current issues of ensuring strategic security. That wasn’t referred to in the White Housereadout. Can you enlighten us —THE PRESIDENT: We discussed many things. We did discuss China. We discussed many different things, but we—it was primarily a call on the oil, as you can imagine. And they were very helpful in getting a stabilization price, a stabilization of the number of barrels. I think the number is going to be closer to 20—maybe 15, but closer to 20 than it is going to be to 10. And I think it was a very important call.I also spoke with the King of Saudi Arabia and that was a very important call. And the bottom nine is OPEC Plus. It’s called OPEC Plus because there are other states also, other nations. We came to a very good agreement.Please.Q: You have —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.Q: What was the part about strategic security? Was that —THE PRESIDENT: I would say mostly we were talking about China. We were talking about their borders. And we’re talking about our borders a little bit—our borders with Mexico. Because, as you know, Mexico is a big part of the deal. And Mexico really—it was very complex from the standpoint of Mexico. It was not an easy deal for Mexico. And the President—we appreciated a certain amount of flexibility. But we talked about borders, we talked about China, we talked about Mexico.Q: But “strategic security” sounds more like arms treaties.THE PRESIDENT: Well, I mean, I—we did talk about the arms. Yes, we did. That was a very important part of the call actually. Yeah, good point.Please.Q: So, on Abbott Labs, you said testing is going great. We know that they have—these machines have been sent to some of the governors, but some of them are saying they don’t have the materials to actually conduct the tests.THE PRESIDENT: Well, they have to get the material. You know, the governors have to get the material.Q: The cartridges.THE PRESIDENT: Now, if they can’t get it, they’re going to see us.Q: The government is—the federal government is distributing those cartridges.THE PRESIDENT: I’m talking about the local governments. I’m talking about governors have to get the material. Now, they have machines. In fact, we—we’re going to go into—I’d ask Mike to go into it as soon as I leave. They have very powerful machines that they don’t know they even have. I’m not talking about Abbott; I’m talking about the governors. They have machines that are used for this —Q: The hospital labs.THE PRESIDENT: You know what I’m talk-—do you know what I’m referring to?Q: Yeah, they have the two different machines.THE PRESIDENT: Very big, very powerful machines where, in a certain state’s case, they’re only using 10 percent of their capacity and they didn’t know it. That happens to be Illinois.Jon, please.Q: Okay, well, real quick. Real quick. These 15-minute tests that you’ve sent out, these new ones that you had in the Rose Garden, they say—including Governor Sununu in New Hampshire—that they don’t have the cartridges to actually conduct the test. So when will they get those cartridges?THE PRESIDENT: What do you think the answer to that is?THE VICE PRESIDENT: We’re rapidly—we’re rapidly increasing the numbers, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Rapidly increasing the numbers.THE VICE PRESIDENT: And Deb will speak to (inaudible).Q: Can we look into when?THE PRESIDENT: Rapidly increases. Well, pretty quickly.Q: They can—they can do 50,000 a day, right?THE PRESIDENT: Well, you have other machines where they can really work.Q: Can they go up beyond that?THE PRESIDENT: And a lot of the states have the big machines that can do a lot. They didn’t even know they had them. They didn’t even know that they had them. And Mike is going to be talking about that.Q: And you remember you mentioned, several weeks ago, the—that Google was putting together that websitewhere they would handle the drive-through testing?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Google and Apple.Q: Have you—have you given up on —THE PRESIDENT: You mean Google and Apple combination.Q: Have you—have you moved past that, because you said —THE PRESIDENT: No. A lot of people don’t like it from the standpoint of constitutional rights. I mean, a lot of people don’t like it and some people think it’s great. No, they are working on that, as I understand.Q: How about the testing website? Remember you said a website for Google and —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, no, I know that. I know that. I know.Q: And it’s only operating in, I think, five counties in California right now. Is that —THE PRESIDENT: That’s right. No, Google is looking at it, but Google is also working with Apple or looking at something. We have the greatest companies in the world looking at things that, in a year from now, everything that we’re looking at now is going to be obsolete. That’s how good it is.We have things happening that are unbelievable. I saw a presentation today that I can’t talk about yet, but it’s incredible. Plus, I think they’re doing—Tony—I think they’re doing very well in the vaccines. They’re working hard on the vaccines and I think you’ll have an answer for vaccines. I believe that there’s some great things coming out with respect to that. Now you need a testing period, but you’re going to have some great things.Please.Q: Sir, on the contact tracing that Google and Apple are doing—so a different subject, on the contact —THE PRESIDENT: No, no. This is—this is the Google and Apple. I don’t know if it’s a partnership or what, but they’re working on some —Q: Correct. So there was the one —THE PRESIDENT: They’re working on more than one element. They’re working on a couple of different things, Google and Apple. Google is also working on something, as you know, having to do with testing. I believe they’re doing that in a singular fashion.Q: So my question is not about the drive-through testing website. Not that.THE PRESIDENT: Okay.Q: On Google and Apple’s contact tracing that they want to —THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Yeah.Q:—they’ve got this process now where they can put, you know, contact tracing on your phone.THE PRESIDENT: I know.Q: If you opt in, you can be alerted if you’ve been —THE PRESIDENT: That’s right.Q:—in contact with someone with the coronavirus. Do you—how do you feel about that?THE PRESIDENT: Well, it’s an amazing thing, but a lot of people have some very big constitutional problems with it. You know that. It’s an amazing thing and it would be—actually, as you know, other countries are thinking about using something similar but not as good.Q: Which other countries are thinking about something similar?THE PRESIDENT: I hear Singapore is. Singapore is. No, Singapore had a little bit of a setback because they had a –they had a break. You know that, and—but they’ll take care of it. I know—I know the folks in Singapore. They’re doing a great job and they’re going to put it back very quickly. But Singapore and other countries are looking at other things, and some countries are doing other things.Q: Would you prefer that Americans use some other system?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t want to get into that because we have a whole constitutional thing. We have more of a constitutional problem than a mechanical problem, but we will be making a determination on that. That’s something we’re going to be discussing with a lot of people over the next four weeks. That would be a very accurate way of doing it, but a lot of people have a problem with it.Yeah, please. Go ahead.Q: A testing question, maybe for Dr. Fauci as well. Can you talk about where the antibody test is and how quickly that will be (inaudible)?THE PRESIDENT: Well, it’s moving along. I think I can speak because I—I have to leave. Moving along quickly, moving along well. It’s a test that’s been going along for many, many years, except now we have very modern, very incredible versions of it. But that’s moving on. The antibody test have—moving along very well.Okay, anymore COVID-19? COVID-19?Yeah, Steve.Q: One soldier on the Theodore Roosevelt has died. Has—have you determined the status of Captain Crozier, the former commander?THE PRESIDENT: Well, that’s going through the Navy, as I understand it. The Navy is going to be making decisions on all of that. And they had a break in—I don’t think the ship should have been stopping in Vietnam when you have a pandemic, to be honest with you. You know, I don’t think the captain should have been writing letters. He’s not Ernest Hemingway, as I said before, and he shouldn’t have been writing letters.And I don’t think—I don’t know who gave the orders to stop in Vietnam. But they stopped in Vietnam and all of a sudden they get on, and now you have over 500 sailors and—and people on the ship that are affected. I don’t know whose idea that was, but that wasn’t such a good idea in the middle of a pandemic.Yes, please. Jon. Go ahead, Jon.Q: Just one last—on this question of constitutionality, I’m just wondering what changed your view because —THE PRESIDENT: Nothing changed it. No, no, I know exactly what you’re going to say. Nothing changed it. The fact that I want to rely on states or maybe will or maybe have, and the fact that we’ve gotten on—that’s one thing. The fact that I don’t want to use the power is another thing. Look —Q: But you said from the standpoint of the Constitution —THE PRESIDENT: Yes, Constitution.Q:—you thought it should be up to the governors.THE PRESIDENT: Constitutionally. You can look at constitutionally. You can look at federalism. You can look at it any different way. Jon, the fact that I don’t want to exert my power is much different. We have the power.You asked, “Does the federal government have the power?” The federal government has absolute power. It has the power. As to whether or not I’ll use that power, we’ll see. I would rather —Q: So if New York wants to stay closed down, you can —THE PRESIDENT: Jon, I would rather work with the states, because I like going down to a local government. That’s why with—I guess it’s now seven states not eight that—because South Carolina did—you know, they went away from what we discussed the last time. So that’s why I looked at the individual states; they’re doing a very good job. They’re really doing a very good job. I’d rather have them make the decision.Now, the fact that I’d rather have—that’s fine. But I have the absolute right to do if I want to. I may not want to. We have a very good relationship. Now, we’ll see what happens.If you notice, the few states you’re talking about, they’re all with Democrat governors. But if governors are doing a good job and they control it better—because you don’t have somebody in Washington saying, “Set up a testing site in the parking lot of a Walmart.” And we’re in Washington and they’re in a state that’s very far away. That’s really—it should be and it should have always been. And I’ve always said it was.But the relationship we have now with the states and governors is very good. And we’ll be announcing, over the next very short period of time, exactly what we’re going to be doing.Okay, a couple of more. Go ahead.Q: On coronavirus and Joe Biden: He’s the presumptive Democratic nominee. Do you have any plans yet on when you’ll start sharing, or when the White House will start sharing some of that information about the coronavirus? Your presidential daily brief?THE PRESIDENT: Well, nobody has called about coronavirus, about—from their standpoint. Look, they had the H1N1, which is swine flu, and that was a big failure. That was a tremendous failure. They had a lot of failures. And you take a look at what—you take a look at the history. And, you know, 17,000 people died. And you talk about late? They were so late—they were late like it never even existed. That was a—that was a big problem. Caused a lot of other people a big problem too.So, you know, if Joe Biden would like a briefing, I’d certainly get him a briefing. I don’t know what he’d do with it.Yeah, please.Q: So, are Jared and Ivanka on—serving on the new task force? And how are you going to balance —THE PRESIDENT: No.Q: What?THE PRESIDENT: No, they’re not. No.Q: Okay.THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Yes, go ahead, please.Q: I just want to clarify. So, in earlier conversation, there was a description of multiple different councils or tasks—task forces. Can you just explain exactly what the structure is and who is going to be on it?THE PRESIDENT: Well, you have Mike’s task force, which is the White House Task Force, which really brought us up to this point brilliantly, I must say. Dealt with governors and dealt with governors all the way through. And I was on many of those calls. And every call got better and better and better. It was hostile at the beginning. By the time we finished—I mean, today’s call was a very good call, a very friendly call. I think everyone is online.And again, you don’t have anybody driving you crazy, saying they’re not getting ventilators, they’re not getting all of the different things, they need more beds. They have a lot of beds right now.Q: (Inaudible) hospitals who—doctors who say they don’t have the supplies that they need.THE PRESIDENT: And we always err—and I think it’s important for you know—we always erred on the sake of “Give them more.” Even when we didn’t think—we didn’t think New York needed the beds that they were asking for. We didn’t think they needed the ventilators that they asked for. And we were right.Now, on ventilators, we’re ready to march. I told you this: We’re ready to march. We have 10,000 ventilators. We’re ready to move them anywhere in the country when we need them, if we need them. We’re also building a lot of ventilators, and that’s going to be used at some point, I believe. You know we’re going to have stockpiles, including state stockpiles if they want to work out some kind of an arrangement with us. But we’re also going to help other countries, whether it’s Italy, or Spain, or other—France is having a big problem. They all desperately need—Germany too—they need ventilators.So we’re going to have a lot of ventilators. We have a lot—you heard the numbers—we have a lot coming next week. Next week, we have a tremendous amount coming.Okay, final question. Steve.Q: And on the task force—I’d asked for the task—how the task force is going to be structured. Is it one —THE PRESIDENT: No. Then we have—in addition to that, we have a number of committees. We’ll have a transportation committee. We’re going to have a manufacturing committee. You’ll see it tomorrow.We’re also having a religious leaders committee. We have a great group of religious leaders. We’re having committees with religious leaders. You’ve been seeing what’s going on with the churches, and all of that. And we’re going to have a faith leaders committee.And so we have—we’re going to have a few committees. I’ll call them “committees,” and then ultimately we’re going to make decisions. So we’re going to make decisions fairly quickly, and I think they’re going to be the correct decision. I hope so.Steve.Q: So you form the economic task force tomorrow. When do you want them to have recommendations for you?THE PRESIDENT: Soon. Soon. And they already know what I want.Q: Next week or —THE PRESIDENT: And so, when we form—when you say “form,” I don’t have to give them instructions. These are very sophisticated people. These are the best people in their fields. So I don’t have to say, “Gee, let’s—we just met and we’re going to meet in two weeks and here’s what we’re…” I said, “Here’s what I want.” We’ve already told them. And they’re the —Q: What did you tell them you want?THE PRESIDENT:—the best names in the various businesses and professions and religions. I mean, they’re—these are the greatest names. The people that, I think, probably know the best.So, we’ve called them and we’re going to be speaking to them very soon. And we want them to have—if it’s questions, or statements, we want them to have that for us. And we will have either a response, or maybe—I mean, ideally we’re going to be learning from them. And we’ll be able to do that and put them—put everything we learned from those calls into our new guidelines.So we’re going to have new guidelines coming soon. I think it’s going to be very good. I think it’s going to be very smooth. And I hope it’s going to be very safe.Thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you.Q: Any thoughts on Stanley Chera, sir? Any thoughts on Stanley Chera —THE PRESIDENT: Stanley Chera is a friend of mine for a long time. He’s a great real estate person—passed away. Was a great real estate person. Great. Great. Sort of a legend in New York real estate.He called me a couple of weeks ago, said he tested positive. Stanley is in his early- to mid-80s, I guess. And Stanley went to the hospital and he never came out. He went into a coma. He was unconscious for a long period of time and he never made it. A great man. He left—very charitable, really a great philanthropist. A very, very successful person in Manhattan, in the real estate business. So I got to know him a lot.He was so excited when his friend from New York became the President of the United States. He was like—like a young boy. And he was not a young boy, but he was like a young boy. He was so excited. He thought we’d do such a good job and he was so happy. And he—he was very proud of what we’ve done in this administration.But he was tested positive, and unfortunately he—he didn’t make it. It’s a very—to me, it’s a very sad thing.Thank you all very much. Thank you.Q: Thank you.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. President. As the President mentioned, the task force today spoke to 48 of the nation’s governors. On that call, we reflected on the fact that all—all 50 states had emergency declarations in place, which was a first for American history; $5.2 billion had been distributed to the states under the Stafford Act. And it was a productive call and reflective of President Trump’s ongoing direction for us to work closely with the states to make sure the states in the areas most impacted by the coronavirus have what they need, when they need it.We spoke about the issue of testing and supplies. And I’m going to ask Dr. Deborah Birx to come forward, as well as Admiral Polowczyk, to reflect on both of those topics for you. Dr. Birx has been leading an effort from the task force from early on, on rapidly expanding testing.It was early on that the President formed that public-private partnership with commercial labs. And as we stand here today, more than 2.5 million tests have been performed. And when we add in the estimates of labs that we have to assume, with reasonable protections—projections have not yet reported into the CDC, we think that number could be closer to 3 million tests that have been performed.As has been mentioned, the new 15-minute test, we are—we are working closely with Abbott Laboratories—that the President and our team met with today here at the White House—to rapidly increase the availability of cartridges. Abbott is producing roughly 50,000 cartridges a day. FEMA acquired an initial supply of that and distributed those to the states, but we’re working with the states to not only distribute what’s being made, but also work with other suppliers to create additional cartridges.A point that I’ll ask Dr. Birx to expand on in just a moment is the fact that—beyond the new 15-minute test by Abbott Laboratories; beyond what we expect to be a new antibody test, which may well be approved by the FDA in just a matter of days; and an antibody test that would be produced at the rate of 20 million tests a month—the reality is that those commercial laboratories that the President brought in here, the better part of two months ago, and initiated that public- and private-partnership with have been producing hundreds of thousands of tests every single week.But as Dr. Birx and our team have apprehended, we believe, at this point in time, that of the Roche equipment that is out there that does the high-speed testing—and we informed governors of this today—we think that that some 20 percent of that capacity is not being used.And with regard to the Abbott m2000 systems, we told the governors today that we think 75 percent of that laboratory capacity that exists in the United States today is not being utilized by our governors. So we sent a very clear message to governors today to reach out to their hospitals, reach out to their labs to identify the presence of the Roche Amplicor 500 and the Abbott m2000 to get those activated.We literally estimate that, although we’re doing over 110,000 tests a day in the United States, that if our—if our governors and state labs would simply activate the machines that are already there, we could double the amount of testing in the United States literally overnight. And so, I know that governors’ teams watch these briefings, and we’ll remind them very respectfully again to identify those labs. And we have a—we have a team that now is deploying, reaching out to labs to see if we can activate all of those labs.Secondly, on the subject of supplies—I’ve said it a couple of times from this podium today, but let me say it one more time: President Trump’s direction to us, in dealing with the states on personal protective equipment and ventilators, has been to make sure that states have what they need, when they need it. And we recognize that while we all watch the overall curve of the coronavirus in America—understandably, the national numbers—the reality is this outbreak has taken place in its own individual curves: first, on the West Coast; then the New York City area; then Louisiana, Michigan; and now we continue to contend with it in Chicago and Houston and other metropolitan areas. It has given us the opportunity to ensure that personal protective equipment and ventilators are made available on a critical basis.And I have to tell you: We’re incredibly proud of the effort and the partnership with states that has us standing here today that no one who has required a ventilator has been denied a ventilator in the United States of America.At this point, we have just short of 7,000 ventilators in the Strategic National Stockpile. But as—as Admiral Polowczyk will detail, we’re already beginning to receive newly manufactured ventilators. We’ll get another thousand in this week. By the middle of May, we’ll literally have another 8,000 ventilators available for deployment around the country.I’m going to let him describe to you the specific detailing of those resources. But—but I want to—I want to share these numbers, most especially for our healthcare workers around the country in the areas most impacted by the coronavirus, so that you know the resources are surging into the hospital systems at the point of the need, and we will continue to do just that.So let me recognize Dr. Birx to reflect on the data and also on, maybe, some comments on testing. And then Admiral Polowczyk, if you can step up and then you’ll describe the supplies. We’ll hear from Dr. Fauci again, and then take a few questions.DR. BIRX: Great. Thank you, Mr. Vice President. I don’t know if we can get the first slide on cumulative cases? Yes, thank you so much.I wanted to show you a different way of looking at it today. Obviously, we look at case counts per 100,000 Americans in each of our states and metro areas, but I wanted you to see, in absolute numbers, how much the New York, New Jersey metro area dwarfs all other metro areas.And so you can’t even see Chicago, Detroit, or Boston. All of those metro areas are under 25,000 cases. You can see that the New York, New Jersey metro area is about almost 250,000 when you bring those cases together—almost a log more. And that’s why you hear us talking a lot about the metro area of New York and New Jersey; and the counties of Rockland and Westchester and Suffolk and Nassau and Bergen, New Jersey; and why we’re so focused on getting resources to that metro area.If I could see the next slide, then. So if I take New York and New Jersey metro area out, this is the other metro areas that we have been tracking very closely. I wanted to show this to you so that you could see how those curves are already starting to plateau.So, if you look at Detroit, if you look at Philadelphia, if you look at Louisiana—Louisiana is in green. Detroit is in gray. You can see across the board, across these metro areas—across metro areas with—have a higher concentration of individuals, this is what the American people in these large cities have done, where it is more difficult often to socially distance. And we’re just really impressed by the work of the mayors and the governors to make this happen.I also wanted you to see this because you can clearly see Chicago and Boston. And so, Chicago is in the orange and Boston is in the yellow. They are crossing Detroit. And that’s why we have been very much focused on the needs of those areas. And there is one—and Providence is also in that category. It’s difficult for them to—for you to see you them because they’re much further down on the slide.But the highest—if you look at the axis on this slide—it’s 25,000. The axis on the last slide was 300,000. And so that’s why I really want people to understand each of these epidemics, minor—these small epidemics in each of the metro areas—we’re tracking independently, as well as any epidemics and outbreaks that are happening in some of our other states.So I just wanted you to have that perspective of how significant the New York, New Jersey issue is and why we’ve been tracking that so closely. But I also wanted to assure all of the other states that we’re tracking them also very closely and really working with the governors and mayors and across—and that’s why I wanted you to see that not only are the curves flattening in some of those major metropolitan areas, but they’re starting to decrease. And this is what we’re very excited about. These are cases. We also know that mortality will lag. And so we’re really tracking also the number of individuals who have succumbed to the COVID-19.I also wanted to really note here that, yes, our mortality is less when you combine European countries equal to the size of the United States. And I think this is really two things: One, it’s the incredible work of the American people, that it’s also the incredible work of our healthcare providers, and the system of each of these hospitals that have the resources and the ability to respond to the needs of the COVID-19 patients. And I think you can really see the superb healthcare delivery that is happening by the low mortality.Just to mention really quickly about testing—because you’ve heard me before talk about it, and then it was a little bit misquoted and misaligned—but there are multiple Abbott machines, so I’m going to be very clear, having spent years in the laboratory. The high-throughput machines, which are the Roche 6800 and the 88-—I think it’s the 8800 on Roche—and the Abbott M2000—these are the machines that run between 500 and 1,000 assays at a time.The Abbott company worked really hard, three weeks ago, in getting a million tests out there to be utilized. And they can make a million tests a week for all of our laboratories that have these platforms. And, so far, to date, somewhere around 250,000 tests have been utilized in three weeks’ worth of work. And that’s why we’ve really been appealing to the—to the laboratory directors to really bring all those machines on.Last week, Dr. Fauci and his incredible team of researchers have agreed to really reach out and find additional Roche and Abbott high-throughput machines that are in research institutions and doing critical research work, to bring them online also to supplement the other laboratories’ work, to create a mosaic and a complete strategy that brings together the high-throughput platforms, with the medium-throughput platforms, with what are the low-throughput but rapid platforms—which is this ID NOW.ID NOW is not going to be the answer to the number of tests that we need over the next few weeks. Those run a test every 15 minutes, and we can get about 55,000 cartridges a day.But I just got done saying that these other machines—of which we have hundreds of—can run 500 to 1,000 in a single timeframe. And so we need to bring all of these assays together. And a team has been created to call every single laboratory and every single research institution across the United States to define the complete capacity in every single state. Because it shouldn’t be our expectation that every governor understands exactly everything that’s in his state, but we have to understand everything in every state in order to be able to meet the needs of the American people as we increase testing.Now, I know you all know that, in three weeks, we went from 300,000 tests total to 3 million tests total, in three weeks. We know that we have to further increase that. That has been done really by HHS and Admiral Giroir and the team up there. And we’re going to supplement that team to really bring on all of the additional resources and platforms that we have in the United States of America, just like we did with ventilators to bring all of the capacity to bear so that we can also continue to increase testing.Also, of course as these epidemics are si-—decrease, you can also be able to use more and more testing for surveillance. But I do want to call out the 19 states that aren’t ever represented in these graphics in—by and large. The states have been continuing to do containment and outbreak investigation.And I’ve been able to talk to many of those states. And I just remind all of us, when I talked to each one of these state health officials, where they are finding outbreaks are in nursing homes. And so we really knew to—need to continue to protect and we continue to test in nursing homes, because we know that that’s a particularly vulnerable group and it’s a group we’re often—now that we’re beginning to understand asymptomatic transmission.No one is intending to pass the virus on to others, but we know, in essential workers around the United States, people are unknowingly infected and then passing the virus on. And so those are the ones that were very interested in finding. And you might say, “Well, how do you find them because they don’t have symptoms?” And so this is where we really have to increase surveillance in a very deliberative and understand way.And so we’re really looking what are sentinel surveillance sites. I think we can see where there’s outbreaks, because once people have symptoms, you can see them. But where do you do sentinel surveillance so that you find them before they have symptoms. This is what we have done for decades in HIV, and it’s what’s allowing us right now to really control the HIV/AIDS epidemic in Sub-Saharan Africa, because we’re finding people when they’re asymptomatic and treating them when they’re asymptomatic. So this is something we know how to do and it’s something we’re working very closely with CDC and others on to make sure that we can bring that full capacity to the American people.So these are just some insights and what we’re working on. We’re continuing, obviously, to track every single county and community.And then, finally, I’m going to call on one additional group. There’s a group out there of our HIV/AIDS activists and community workers that understand these tests that I’ve been talking about, these DNA—these RNA-based tests. Because they often get viral loads in HIV. But they will know how to explain this to the community, about sampling and what it means to run those assays. They are essentially virologists. They understand all of these assays. They also understand the antibody assays, because it’s the antibody assays that they counsel and utilize in HIV testing across the United States.And maybe it will be our translator to the American public and to their local mayors. They understand these tests. They’re—essentially understand all the virology and all the immunology. And I’m really asking all of them to help us communicate what these tests are so the community is ready for them. Because antibody tests measure something very different than the viral load in the front of your nose that we’re using for diagnosis. And so, really being able to understand all of those tests, when to use them, how to use them will be really critical. But the great thing is, in the United States of America, we have these community groups that understand these tests very well, and we’ll be able to discuss them at every level with their community.THE VICE PRESIDENT: I’m going to call Admiral Polowczyk up in a minute, but I have to call on Dr. Tony Fauci.Let me—let me—let me just say something really straight from my heart, if I can. I lost my dad 32 years ago today. April 13th is always a tough day for our family. And this morning, when my brothers and sisters were sending around pictures of dad, like we always do, I just thought of the families of the more than 22,000 Americans that we’ve lost.And I just want to tell you that you’re on our hearts, and you’re in the prayers of millions of Americans as you—as you deal with this heartbreaking loss, as well as families that have family members that are struggling with serious illness.But let me just encourage everyone that, in the midst of that loss, because the American people have been putting these mitigation measures into practice, there are families that are still together today. And I just want to encourage you here at roughly the halfway point of “30 Days to Slow the Spread,” to take—take that to heart. In no way minimize the losses that we’ve experienced as a nation and as families, but—but to be encouraged to know, when you see those numbers on the vast majority of states, that because of what the American people are doing, it’s working.And Dr. Fauci and Dr. Birx, and the entire team, continually asked us to remind the American people, and we do so again today: Keep doing what you’re doing with the “30 Days to Slow the Spread,” and we will hasten the day that we heal our land.Dr. Fauci?DR. FAUCI: I just want to make one comment that related to a question that was asked, and then we’ll have questions. I don’t want to take too much time. The idea about how we would evaluate, from a purely public health standpoint, about what I call reentry into some sort of normality. As health people, I don’t know anything about, nor do I ever claim to know anything about, economics. There are going to be people that know a lot more than I do, who are going to give advice about all of the committees that the President was talking about.But the one thing we do know as health people, as physicians and scientists and public health people—as I mentioned, I think over the weekend, on one of the shows, is that some people may think it’s going to be like a light switch, on and off. You know, we’re either out and we’re in. It’s just not going to be that way because we have a very large country and there are different impacts. As you see, New York is very different from other parts of the country, from the Midwest, from the mountain region, California and Washington, different than New Orleans.So as we discuss and consider the public health aspects, it likely would be something that I refer to as sort of like a rolling reentry. It’s not going to be one size fits all. So I don’t know what it’s going to be yet because we still have time to look at it.Dr. Birx, who does an amazing job with showing you the data and the charts—that’s going to likely influence some of the recommendations that we will make. But I can assure you there will be recommendations that will be based purely on public health. And the President will get a lot of other input from others, but we’ll give the honest, public health recommendation.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Tony. Admiral? Admiral Polowczyk will give an update on supplies and then we’ll take a few questions.REAR ADMIRAL POLOWCZYK: Thank you, Mr. Vice President. Can I have the ventilator slide back up? I’ll just start from there. All right, thank you.So you start with what’s in the stockpile this morning. And then here’s the contracts that we’ll be delivering over the next few weeks. And we added 8,600 ventilators to the pool we already had. That’s the—that’s the math that you—that you get there. That’s a—that’s included the DPA action with GM.And we’ll say that we’ve also issued what would be called “rated orders” with all of these vendors to allow them front-of-the-line privileges, so to speak, with—within their supply chain. So these—there’s—we’ve, you know, written the contract. This is the 100,000-plus ventilators we’re talking about, and then continue to work with them to ensure that the ventilators actually show up. So there’s a continue to work there. And as we did that, we realized that downstream supply chains needed some additional Defense Production Act work as well.If you go out to the air bridge—80 flights scheduled, 37 complete, 43 on the—on the horizon. And you can see the numbers of material that’s been brought in to supplement the volume that’s needed.Now, I’m going to go through a series of slides of New York first. So, Dr. Birx provides me what I will call as a geographic reference to align the supply chain. So all of those cities—you’ll see a little bit of a theme here. I’ll be talking about a lot of the—a lot of the cities and geographic areas.I aligned the supply chain to those geographic areas to try to get as much there, while we realize the rest of the nation needs supplies as well. And then we aligned to the supply chain to site of care: public hospitals, VA, private hospitals, nursing homes, first responders, acute care, and on down the line.So the last business week—so, Monday of last week through Friday, Saturday of the past week—these are the mass materials that came into the New York, New Jersey metro area, and you can see the volumes there.So if you go to Detroit, we talked about their hotspot. Here’s the volumes of deliveries going into Detroit for that same time period.If you can go to Chicago. And I’m going to run through this kind of quick, but you can see that the geographic alignment, the places that Dr. Birx has talked about is where we’re concentrating supplies.You can go to New Orleans, to give you an understanding. Washington D.C., right? So now I can talk about that. Today was a—you know, a very, kind of, early entry into the Washington, D.C., Baltimore—right?—positioning supplies ahead of need, we hope, in Washington.Go to Baltimore, and you can see trying to—the volumes there, trying to get ahead of that. And then Philadelphia is next.And then now the next slide is a nine-city roll-up. And so to save a little time, I did not include Boston and Houston in there. So you can see the volume of material flowing through a commercial network air bridge, their supplies, into geographic regions and then—and then further prioritize to site of care.Now, final topic: N95 masks. So the Department of Defense announced a DPA action this weekend. That came over from DOD on Friday, into the White House, approved on Saturday. And contract awarded today $131 million, five companies: 3M, Honeywell, Owens &amp; Minor, Moldex, and Draeger.You know, the CARES Act was signed before the—before March was end—towards the end there. So essentially two weeks from that money being put into the Title III authority for DOD. This action takes us from a baseline of what—what was being produced domestically of about 30 million masks upwards to, as we go through the fall into the end of the winter, 120 million masks domestically.So, currently, we’re filling some of that demand from overseas sources. Right? And so the additive masks here, through this, will ramp up, lower dependence on overseas sources, and that—that will essentially secure a big piece of the supply chain.Five companies, six—six cities: Smithfield, Rhode Island; Phoenix, Arizona; Del Rio, Texas; Lexington, North Carolina; Sheboygan Falls, Wisconsin; and Aberdeen, North Dakota—all either producing more fabric or increasing production facilities to have that ramp up.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Great. Great job. Thank you, Admiral.And can we put that slide—I guess it’s still up. This is for just the week ending April 11. We have distributed or directed the distribution of 5.3 million N95 masks, 5.5 million surgical masks, 110 million gloves. We shared that mostly just to make sure our healthcare workers know that the resources are flowing, we’re going to continue to flow them, but this is just the numbers for this week and don’t include, for instance, what the President announced.I was able to tell Governor Tom Wolf of Pennsylvania today that, next week, they’ll be receiving 2 million N95 masks to support some of the healthcare challenges that they’re facing in the broader Philadelphia area.So, with that, we’ll be happy to take a couple of questions. Go ahead.Q: Thank you so much. One for the Admiral and then one for Dr. Fauci, if you don’t mind.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Please.Q:Admiral, wouldn’t it have been useful, as you’re going through, you know, all of those supplies that are now making their way into the system—you talked about having to buy foreign products, you know, as we’re catching up and making it—wouldn’t it have been useful if it hadn’t taken until mid-March for the government to start placing bulk orders for these kinds of supplies?REAR ADMIRAL POLOWCZYK: Okay so, I came over from the Pentagon the 20th of March, so I’ll speak from the 20th March on now. We’re using the Defense Production Act. I think you’ll see much more use of that as we go forward. You know, we make —Q: Sir, but my question is about the timing here and that lost time that the President earlier today denied.REAR ADMIRAL POLOWCZYK: I know. And I’m not—I’m not equipped to talk about—other than from about the 20th of March forward. I just—I wasn’t—I was over at the Joint Staff. I wasn’t involved.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Okay.Q: And I wanted to ask Dr. Fauci —THE VICE PRESIDENT: Dr. Fauci.Q:—you know, you said that you’d be, you know, giving the President your recommendations, you and Dr. Birx, coming up with a plan that you guys are comfortable with. Are you willing, once the President has made his decision, are you willing to come here and tell us, tell the American public, what you actually had recommended to him and whether he followed through with what you recommended?DR. FAUCI: I’m not really—what do you mean? Like —Q: So when the President stands up here, whether it’s, you know, May 1st—whatever day it is—and outlines his plan, are you willing to stand up here after him and tell us all, tell the American public, what it was that you had recommended he do if there is a difference?DR. FAUCI: You know, I have to think about that because, you know, when you have conversations with the President, sometimes they really should be confidential in what you give him because he’s going to have to make his own choice.I’d have to think about that.Q: So that way we would know whether he was actually listening to the health advice that he’s being provided.DR. FAUCI: Right. Yeah. He is. I mean, he—I can tell you one thing: He’ll listen. But I think what’s going to happen—you know, I don’t know for sure—is that he will get input from a number of individuals representing a number of aspects of society; one of them will be health. The only thing that I can tell you is that I will give him the advice based on evidence, my observation of what the best public health approach would be.Q: Dr. Fauci?DR. FAUCI: Yeah.Q: Just to go back to where we started today, which was with the President’s seeming frustrations with some of the reporting about his early decision-making process in January and February.As I’m sure you know, the reason we, in the press, do that kind of reporting is so that the next President that comes along, has to deal with a pandemic, can learn some of these lessons.What—having watched this unfold up close, what do you think were the mistakes that were made early on that a future President could learn from? With the benefit of hindsight, of course.DR. FAUCI: You know, I —Q: Because no President gets everything right, obviously.DR. FAUCI: I understand. I don’t want to use the word “mistakes,” because when you’re in the—in the fog of war when you’re doing something, you have to make decisions. You get input from a number of individuals. It’s always a moving target. And I just don’t want to be—have anything taken out of context because I already had one of those already in the last couple of days—(laughs)—so I don’t want to go through it again.I wouldn’t say “mistake.” Could things have done better? Of course. I mean, nothing is perfect. And you could always do better. But, I mean, I hesitate to say something is a “mistake.”Q: But with the benefit of hindsight, with that caveat, what could have been done better?DR. FAUCI: Well, I mean, I can’t—I can’t comment about anything outside of my own field. But the thing that, when I think back on, was evolving, in my mind, was something that was a virus that was much worse than what I had thought it was going to be, based on what we had learned early on, when it was first felt to be something that just jumped from an animal to a human, and really didn’t have much capability of going human to human. And then, all of a sudden, you find out that not only was it not just animal to human, but there were a lot of—that’s probably the way it started.But then, as you go back and you realize there were probably a lot of infections, that maybe if we had dealt into that a little bit more, we could have learned that not only is it affecting human to human, but it’s transmitting really efficiently.When I question myself—I’m not perfect; maybe I—I wouldn’t say made “mistakes,” but maybe I should have really tried to delve into that a little bit more about what was going on, but the information wasn’t as forthcoming as I would have liked.And then, all of a sudden, when you find out that you’re dealing with something that is not only what had been your worst nightmare—because people ask me that: “What is your worst nightmare?”—a brand-new virus that’s respiratory transmitted, that has a high degree of transmissibility, that has a high degree of morbidity and mortality. You know, is that a mistake? Maybe I should have been able to realize that earlier. I’m not sure it was a mistake; it was just an evolving thing that we finally realized and said, “Whoa, this is really worse than we could have imagined.”AIDE: All right. Last one, guys.Q: When you met with Abbott Laboratories today, what did you ask them to do? What did they say they could do?THE VICE PRESIDENT: Well, we spoke with Abbott Laboratories today about how we can increase significantly the production of cartridges for the 15-minute test. Because, remember, we’re—we are—we’re not only scaling to rapidly expand testing across the country today. And it’s one of the reasons why you heard me and Dr. Birx say that we are—we have an entire team now that’s going to be working with governors and with laboratories around the country to identify the machines that already exist today and that could be activated in doing tests.But we also—we also want to work with Abbott Laboratories for the longer term. Because if the current trend lines hold—and I hope and I literally pray that we will soon find ourselves on the downslope of the coronavirus in this country—this epidemic, in its current form, will come to an end.But as we make decisions in the days ahead to reopen America, what President Trump also wants to do is have a policy in place to stay open. And having the kind of surveillance testing available around the country so that CDC can do the immediate contact tracing, when you have a positive test, so that we can deploy resources like the new Abbott 15-minute test specifically to nursing homes.We spoke today to Governor Baker in Massachusetts, to Governor Hogan in Maryland, both of whom who have been very innovative implementing federal guidelines for preventing the spread of infectious disease at nursing homes, and we commend them for that. But being able to increase the manufacture of those devices so they can be deployed going forward in the months ahead is also a focal point of our efforts.So, rapidly continuing to expand testing today. And the governor of Louisiana told me today that they had tested at the highest per capita—according to his numbers—of any state in the union. And we congratulate him for that. But making sure that, going forward, we’ll have the infrastructure of testing all across America to deal with the coronavirus should it return in the future.With that, let me—let me bid you all a good evening. And we will be back tomorrow. And —Q: Mr. Vice President —THE VICE PRESIDENT: Okay. Go ahead.Q: I just have a question about these cartridges and this timeline because the New Hampshire governor says the federal government is in charge of distributing those—FEMA is. So what is the timeline for when they’ll have enough of them? Because they say they don’t have enough. Illinois said they didn’t have enough. So what’s the timeline that you’re working with?THE VICE PRESIDENT: Yeah, let me—let me let Dr. Birx address that. But there’s a—there was an initial tranche that we purchased. There’s some 18,000 Abbott Laboratory machines around the country, and FEMA acquired a certain amount that were immediately distributed across the states.But now Abbott Laboratories is literally producing some 50,000 a day, and those are available in the open market. And we’re also going to be working with Abbott and with the states to deploy those resources.And we’re also working with other manufacturers to increase the production of cartridges. But if there’s more to that that you want to add, Deb, we’ll make it the last.DR. BIRX: No, that was perfectly said. I just want to—sometimes you ask those questions, and I always want to make sure that people understand.So, a third of them went specifically to Indian Health Service and to these states that have smaller epidemics. Two thirds of it went into the public market, mostly targeted to the places where there is high disease. But only two thirds went that way so that people could purchase them directly, and one third went to the Indian Health Service and to the smaller states that really need these.And so I think what we’re trying to do now is balance the entire testing framework of medium-, low-, and high-throughput machines to give everyone the maximum flexibility, state by state, based on what the needs are at that moment.If there’s an outbreak and you have to do 5,000 tests, you’re not going to do them on an ID NOW machine that takes 15 minutes for every negative, but you’re going to do it on your high-throughput machine. So making sure everybody knows where everything is and what is being run will be really critical moving forward, because we can’t leave anything not on –everything has to be on the table in order for us to be able to dramatically increase testing yet another—we went up by a log in three weeks. So if we’re going to increase again, it’s going to have to be getting every piece of equipment onTHE VICE PRESIDENT: Let just again say thank you all for your time and attention. And thanks to every American who’s joined us tonight.I just want to encourage you we’re going to continue to lean into this effort, to expand testing across the country, to deploy supplies to our incredible healthcare workers that have done such an amazing job in the midst of the coronavirus epidemic.But my last word, on behalf of the President, on behalf of our entire task force is: It’s “30 Days to Slow the Spread.” And I know we’re almost at the halfway point, and I know it’s been a month of these mitigation strategies, but I hope as you look on, as you see the progress that’s made on the West Coast, the beginnings of real progress in the Greater New York City area, Louisiana, Detroit, and elsewhere—I hope it will only steel your resolve to continue to do your part to slow the spread, because we’ll get through this, but it’ll take all of us to continue to do it.So thank you to the American people for all your efforts, and we’ll see you tomorrow. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, everyone. Thank you. Thank you.A beautiful day in the Rose Garden. Appreciate everybody being here. Today, I’d like to provide an update to the American people on several decisive new actions we’re taking in our very vigilant effort to combat and ultimately defeat the coronavirus.We’ve been working very hard on this. We’ve made tremendous progress. When you compare what we’ve done to other areas of the world, it’s pretty incredible. A lot of that had to do with the early designation and the closing of the borders.And, as you know, Europe was just designated as the hotspot right now, and we closed that border a while ago. So that was lucky or through talent or through luck. Call it whatever you want. But through a very collective action and shared sacrifice and national determination, we will overcome the threat of the virus.I also announced Wednesday night, following the advice of our medical professionals who are doing a tremendous job—and we appreciate it very much—that we’re suspending the entry of foreign nationals who have been to Europe in the last 14 days from entering the United States. Citizens, permanent residents, and our families—and even the families returning from Europe, will be subject to extra screening as well self-isolation for a period of 14 days.As the World Health Organization confirmed today, many of the things that—what we said were 100 percent correct, including our designation, before them, of Europe. Like our earlier, very aggressive actions with China, this measure will save countless lives. I appreciate a number of the folks behind me. A number of the people behind me said that that saved a lot of lives, that early designation.But it is only the beginning of what we’re really doing, and now we’re in a different phase. We had some very old and obsolete rules that we had to live with. It worked under certain circumstances but not under mass circumstances. They were there for a long time; they were in place for a long time. And we’re breaking them down now. And they’re very usable for certain instances, but not for this.To unleash the full power of the federal government in this effort, today I am officially declaring a national emergency. Two very big words. The action I am taking will open up access to up to $50 billion of very importantly—very important and a large amount of money for states and territories and localities in our shared fight against this disease.In furtherance of the order, I’m urging every state to set up emergency operation centers effective immediately. You’re going to be hearing from some of the largest companies and greatest retailers and medical companies in the world. They’re standing right behind me and to the side of me.I’m also asking every hospital in this country to activate its emergency preparedness plan so that they can meet the needs of Americans everywhere. The hospitals are very engaged. New York and various other places are also various engaged. I just spoke with Governor Cuomo; we had a very good conversation. And we’re working very strongly with many states, including New York.The emergency orders I am issuing today will also confer broad new authority to the Secretary of Health and Human Services. The Secretary of HHS will be able to immediately waive provisions of applicable laws and regulations to give doctors, hospital—all hospitals—and healthcare providers maximum flexibility to respond to the virus and care for patients.This includes the following critical authorities:<ul><li>The ability to waive laws to enable telehealth, a fairly new and incredible thing that’s happened in the—in the not-so-distant past. I tell you, what they’ve done with telehealth is incredible. It gives remote doctors’ visits and hospital check-ins.</li><li>The power to waive certain federal license requirements so that doctors from other states can provide services and states with the greatest need. Number two.</li><li>The ability to waive requirements that critical-access hospitals limit the number of beds to 25 and the length of stay to 96 hours.</li><li>The ability to waive the requirements of a three-day hospital stay prior to admission to a nursing home. Big thing.</li><li>The authority to waive rules that hinder hospitals’ ability to bring additional physicians on board or obtain needed office space. They can do as they want. They can do what they have to do. They know what they have to do. Now they don’t have any problem getting it done.</li><li>The authority to waive rules that severely restrict where hospitals can care for patients within the hospital itself, ensuring that the emergency capacity can be quickly established.</li></ul>We’ll remove or eliminate every obstacle necessary to deliver our people the care that they need and that they’re entitled to. No resource will be spared. Nothing whatsoever.Ten days ago, I brought together the CEOs of commercial labs at the White House and directed them to immediately begin working on a solution to dramatically increase the availability of tests. Other countries have called us and worked with us, and they’re doing similar things or will be doing similar things.As a result of that action, today we’re announcing a new partnership with private sector to vastly increase and accelerate our capacity to test for the coronavirus. We want to make sure that those who need a test can get a test very safely, quickly, and conveniently. But we don’t want people to take a test if, if we feel that they shouldn’t be doing it. And we don’t want everyone running out and taking. Only if you have certain symptoms.Using federal emergency authorities, the FDA approved a new test for the virus. We did this within hours after receiving the application from Roche—a process that would normally take weeks. We therefore expect up to a half a million additional tests will be available early next week. We’ll be announcing locations probably on Sunday night.I want to thank Roche, a great company, for their incredible work. I’d also like to thank Thermo Fisher. The FDA’s goal is to hopefully authorize their application within 24 hours—it’ll go very quickly; it’s going very quickly—which will bring, additionally, 1.4 million tests on board next week and 5 million within a month. I doubt we’ll need anywhere near that.At the same time, we’ve been in discussions with pharmacies and retailers to make drive-thru tests available in the critical locations identified by public health professionals. The goal is for individuals to be able to drive up and be swabbed without having to leave your car.I want to thank Google. Google is helping to develop a website. It’s going to be very quickly done, unlike websites of the past, to determine whether a test is warranted and to facilitate testing at a nearby convenient location.We have many, many locations behind us, by the way. We cover the, this country in large part. So the world, by the way, we’re not going to be talking about the world right now. But we cover very, very strongly our country. Stores in virtually every location.Google has 1,700 engineers working on this right now. They’ve made tremendous progress. Our overriding goal is to stop the spread of the virus and to help all Americans who have been impacted by this.Again, we don’t want everybody taking this test; it’s totally unnecessary. And this will pass. This will pass through, and we’re going to be even stronger for it. We’ve learned a lot. A tremendous amount has been learned.I want to thank Deborah Birx, and I want to ask her maybe to come up and say a few words as to what’s happening. Dr. Birx is a highly respected person. I’ve gotten to know her very well over the last six days. And what we’ve done is rebuild something that was very old, very old-fashioned, somewhat obsolete. Certainly obsolete when it comes to the kind of numbers that we’re talking about.Dr. Birx, please. Thank you, Deborah.DR. BIRX: Thank you, Mr. President. It’s a pleasure to be here with all of you.I think you know—at the beginning of this epidemic, HHS, through CDC, proactively developed an assay built on the existing flu surveillance system. That surveillance system was then converted to diagnostic system.But last Tuesday, seeing the spread of the virus around the globe, the President realized that our current approach to testing was inadequate to need—to meet the needs of the American public. He asked for an entire overhaul of the testing approach. He immediately called the private sector laboratories to the White House, as noted, and charged them with developing a high-throughput quality platform that can meet the needs of the American public.We are grateful to LabCorp and Quest for taking up the charge immediately after the meeting and within 72 hours bringing additional testing access, particularly to the outbreak areas of Washington State and California, and now across the country.We are also very grateful to the universities and large hospital systems that took up the charge to develop their own quality tests made available by new FDA guidance. This has resulted in expanded testing across New York, California, Washington, Colorado, and you see sometimes those drive-thru options that have been made available through these high-throughput options.Following the meeting last week, major commercial laboratory equipment and diagnostic companies took immediate action to adopt and develop new testing systems. Last night, the initial company, Roche, received FDA approval, moving from request to development to approval in record time.This innovative approach centered fully on unleashing the power of the private sector, focusing on providing convenient testing to hundreds of thousands of Americans within short turnaround times. In less than two weeks together, we have developed a solution that we believe will meet the future needs—testing needs of Americans.I understand how difficult this has been. I was part of the HIV/AIDS response in the ‘80s. We knew, from diag...from first finding cases in 1981, it took us to almost 1985 to have a test. It took us another 11 years to have effective therapy. It is because of the lessons learned from that that we were able to mobilize and bring those individuals that were key to the HIV response to this response.I understand that a lot of this behind-the-scenes action over the last couple of weeks was invisible to the press and the American people. But this intense effort has not only resulted in innovative solutions, but an automated high-throughput system, bringing the availability of these quality coronaviral testing to the American people at unprecedented speed.Finally, I want you to know: In South Korea, they did have large number of tests available over the last several weeks. Their positivity rate is between 3 and 4 percent. With LabCorp and Quest expanded testing, their positivity rate is between 1 and 2 percent.So we want to also announce this new approach to testing, which will start in the screening website up here, facilitated by Google, where clients and patients and people that have interest can go, fill out a screening questionnaire—move down for symptoms or risk factors, yes. They would move down this and be told where the drive-thru options would be for them to receive this test. The labs will then move to the high-throughput automated machines to be able to provide results in 24 to 36 hours.That is the intent of this approach. We have seen it work just in our own United States, and we want to bring this across the continent.Thank you very much.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Deborah. Great.I’d like to maybe have Tony—do you want to come up? You’ve become a...I think everybody out here knows you pretty well. But Tony has been doing a tremendous job working long, long hours. And you’ve seen a lot happen, but this has been, it’s been a great experience, and working with you has been terrific.Tony, please.DR. FAUCI: Thank you very much, Mr. President. This is an example of—another example of what I’ve been referring to in my discussions with many of you in the audience as a proactive, leaning-forward, aggressive, trying to stay ahead of the curve.And what you’re seeing now with this order is that we’re going to be able to remove the constraints so that people at the state and the local level—the individual physician all the way up through the federal government—will have as many constraints as possible removed for them to do everything they possibly can so that we can implement the things that we’ve been talking about—the containment, the mitigation—so that, as I’ve said many times, that curve that I referred to that goes up, we don’t want to have that curve. We want to suppress it down to that small mound.And I think what we’ve done today is something that is going to be a very important element in having us be successful in doing that.We still have a long way to go. There will be many more cases, but we’ll take care of that. And ultimately, as the President said, this will end. But what’s going on here today is going to help it to end sooner than it would have.Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Tony.If I could, some of these folks we know; they’re celebrities in their own right. They’re the biggest business people, the greatest retailers anywhere in the world. And one of them is Doug McMillon from Walmart. And I’d like to have Doug, if you would, say a few words, wherever you may be.Doug, please.MR. MCMILLON: When we got the call yesterday from the White House, we were eager to do our part to help serve the country.\ And given what we’re facing, that’s certainly important to do. We should all be doing that.So we’ve been asked to make portions of our parking lot available in select locations in the beginning, and scaling over time as supply increases, so that people can experience the drive-thru experience that the President described.We’ll stay involved and do everything we can from a supply-chain point of view to be of assistance.Thank you, sir.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Doug. Appreciate it very much.I’ll just stay right over here. And, Richard, if you could come up, please. Richard, please. Walgreens. Thank you.MR. ASHWORTH: Thank you, Mr. President. And similar to Doug and Walmart, we’re happy to stand in here and help in communities all across America. Because a lot of times, when we have natural disasters, our stores are a beacon in the community, and this situation is no different.So we look forward to partnering with the CDC, the administration, HHS, and the task force, and specifically to the Vice President, who’s doing such a fantastic job. We’re ready to engage and help.Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Great job. Thank you very much.Brian Cornell, Target. Thank you, Brian. Thank you. Please.MR. CORNELL: Well, Mr. President, thank you for inviting us here today, along with our colleagues from Walmart and Walgreens and our partners at CVS. Normally, you’d view us as competitors, but today we’re focused on a common competitor, and that’s defeating the spread of the coronavirus. And we look forward to working with the administration to do our fair share to alleviate this growing threat.So, thank you for including us today. In the near term, we’re all committed to making sure we’re keeping our stores open to serve the American consumer who is rapidly stocking up on household essentials, key food and beverage items that they need during this time; making sure we run safe stores; and creating an environment that’s safe for our team members, making sure that they feel supported during this very critical time.So thank you for including us.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Great job.Is Tom here? Tom Polen. Tom? Tom Polen. Please.MR. POLEN: Thank you, Mr. President. As CEO of Becton Dickinson, we’re one of the leading providers of medical devices as well as collection products for testing of coronavirus. We’re ramping up our manufacturing capacity to ensure that the right collection devices and testing equipment are ready to address this issue. Thank you, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Tom. Great job you’ve done.Stephen Rusckowski, Quest Diagnostics. Please. Great job. Thank you very much.MR. RUSCKOWKI: Thank you very much. Thank you, Mr. President.So, as mentioned, we were called, with the leadership of the Vice President, last week to come together as an industry. And we took advantage of that opportunity to work with the FDA, to work with the Center for Disease Control. And we are up and running with tests in a number of our facilities.As the President mentioned, we now have capabilities from Roche diagnostics that we will bring into our facilities this weekend. And I know myself and also my colleague at LabCorp will be doing the same, so the capacity available to the American public to support this action with consumers will be considerably increased in the next few weeks.Thank you, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. I appreciate it.And Matt Sause, please, of Roche. Matt? Thank you, Matt.MR. SAUSE: Thank you, Mr. President. So, from Roche, we want to thank the FDA for their rapid approval of our coronavirus test. We really appreciate the partnership with the CDC and the FDA to get that to market as fast as possible because it’s critical for us to make that available to help patients in need, and working with laboratories to get it up and going in the near future, which will bring hundreds of thousands of tests available to patients in need in the United States. So, thank you.THE PRESIDENT: And you can do it. You can do it. A great company.David Pierre of Signify, Signify Health. Please. Thanks, David.MR. PIERRE: Thank you, Mr. President. We are the largest housecall provider in the U.S., and we go to the homes of the most vulnerable elderly. And through our network and our logistics engine, we stand ready to help and provide our clinicians to be where they’re needed, whether they’re in retail clinics or in the home. And we’re here to assist.Thank you very much.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. And we’ll be changing a lot of the rules, regulations for future, should this happen in the future, which we hope it never does. But it will, I guess, somewhere out there. There are some bad ones over the years, and I guess that’ll continue to an extent, but we hope it never happens. But we’re going to be changing a lot of the old rules and specifications and regulations.Adam Schechter, who has really been of tremendous help. LabCorp. Please. Adam?MR. SCHECHTER: Thank you, Mr. President. At LabCorp, we’re working every second of every day to increase the number of tests that we can run. We’re working with academic medical centers, with our colleagues at Quest, with other hospital and other laboratories to ensure that we do everything we can to increase the testing as we move forward.And I can tell you we understand how important the testing is, and we are committed to doing everything possible.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Great job. Thank you.Thomas Moriarty, CVS. We all know CVS. Thank you.MR. MORIARTY: Thank you, sir.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Thomas.MR. MORIARTY: Thank you, Mr. President We have been focused, since the start, of making sure our patients and the customers we serve have the information they need and the safety they need as well. We are committed to working with the administration and local public health officials to make this work as well. And thank you, sir, for the honor.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Thank you, Thomas. Thanks. Great job.And Bruce Greenstein, LHC Group. Tremendously talented people. Thank you very much.MR. GREENSTEIN: Mr. President, thank you for the honor of being here. And the home health industry has been treating patients and seniors in the safety and comfort of their own home for decades. We’re very proud to be part of the equation for testing in their own home. For Americans that can’t get to a test site or live in rural areas far away from a retail establishment, we’re here to help and to partner with our hospitals and physicians, as well as the people we have here today that will be doing testing around the country. Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Fantastic.(Mr. Greenstein gives the President an elbow bump.)MR. GREENSTEIN: Oh, we’ll practice that.THE PRESIDENT: Okay, I like that. That’s good.We’re also announcing the following emergency executive actions today:To help our students and their families, I’ve waived interest on all student loans held by federal government agencies, and that will be until further notice. That’s a big thing for a lot of students that are left in the middle right now. Many of those schools have been closed.Based on the price of oil, I’ve also instructed the Secretary of Energy to purchase, at a very good price, large quantities of crude oil for storage in the U.S. Strategic Reserve. We’re going to fill it right up to the top, saving the American taxpayer billions and billions of dollars, helping our oil industry and making us even further toward that wonderful goal—which we’ve achieved, which nobody thought was possible—of energy independence. It puts us in a position that’s very strong, and we’re buying it at the right price. And that’s something that would have not even been possible a week ago. The price of oil went down quite a bit, so we’re going to fill it up. This is a good time to fill it up.I’d like to ask Mike Pence to say a few words, please. VP.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mr. President. It is—this day should be an inspiration to every American, because thanks to your leadership from early on, not only are we bringing a whole-of-government approach to confronting the coronavirus, we’re bringing an all-of-America approach.Mr. President, from early on, you took decisive action. You suspended all travel from China. You created travel advisories—South Korea and Italy. We screened all travelers from all airports in both of those countries. And on the unanimous recommendation of your health experts, you, at midnight tonight, will effectively suspend all travel from Europe. And Americans that are returning will be screened and asked to voluntarily participate in a 14-day quarantine.Throughout this process, Mr. President, you’ve put the health of America first, but you brought the best of America to address it. And it’s not just at the federal level. As you said, Mr. President, we’ve been working with states across the country. We issued broad guidelines from CDC for every American. But this week, at your direction, we tailored specific recommendations from CDC for New York, Washington State, California, Massachusetts, and Florida.And we’ve been in continuous contact, as you said, with governors around the country. And, Mr. President, you have forged a seamless partnership with every state and every territory in this country to put the health of our nation first.But today, I trust that people around the country that are looking on at this extraordinary public and private partnership to address the issue of testing with particular inspiration. After you tapped me to lead the White House Corona Task Force, Mr. President, you said this is all hands on deck, and you directed us to immediately reach out to the American business sector commercial labs to meet what we knew then would be the need for testing across the spectrum. And today, with this historic public-private partnership, we have laid the foundation to meet that need.And for Americans looking on, by this Sunday evening, we’ll be able to give specific guidance on a...on when the website will be available. You can go to the website, as the President said. You’ll type in your symptoms and be given direction whether or not a test is indicated.And then, at the same website, you’ll be directed to one of these incredible companies that are going to give a little bit of their parking lot so that people can come by and do a drive-by test.Mr. President, I want to join you in thanking Walmart and CVS and Target and Walgreen. These are companies that are synonymous with communities large and small, where people come together. And now they’re going to come together to meet the needs of the American public.These commercial laboratories—LabCorp and Quest and Roche—have just done an incredible job stepping forward and are going to literally make, literally make hundreds and thousands of tests available and being processed with results to patients in the very near future. But it’s all a result of you tasking us with bringing together not just government resources—which all state labs can now test across the country; CDC is testing but you said, Mr. President, that we wanted to bring all the resources of the country together, and that’s what this partnership really means.You know, the truth is that we have coronavirus cases now in 46 American states. And while the risk of serious illness of the coronavirus remains low, we want to encourage every American to practice common sense, practice good hygiene, go to the CDC’s website to see what the guidance is for your community or for the American people broadly.And as the President has said, it’s especially important now that we look at senior citizens with chronic underlying health conditions. Last week, the President directed the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services to raise the standards at our nursing homes, increase inspections at our nursing homes. And today, we’re offering very specific guidance, which Seema Verma will articulate, about visitations at nursing homes.It’s important to remember that they were there for us when we were growing up, Mr. President. They helped us with our homework. They tucked us in at night. They cheered us on as we pursued educations, cheered us on in our careers. And now it’s time for us to be there with them and to recognize that seniors with chronic health conditions are the most vulnerable, and Americans can make a difference. So wash your hands, use common sense, look after the most vulnerable.And, Mr. President, I know I join you in saying that every American should be proud of this incredible public-private partnership that’s going to speeding access of testing to millions of Americans in the weeks ahead.And together, as you’ve said many times, together we’ll get through this. Together, we’ll put the health of America first.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mike. Thank you very much.Seema. Where is Seema? I’d like you to maybe take that a step further, please, on nursing homes. Thanks.ADMINISTRATOR VERMA: Thank you. Well, thank you to the President for the declaration. It allows my agency, CMS—that runs Medicare and Medicaid and has oversight of all of the nation’s healthcare facilities—to suspend regulations that can get in the way of treating patients during this time.These temporary national blanket waivers are reserved for the rarest of circumstances, and they represent a massive mobilization of our country’s resources to combat this terrible virus. And the flexibilities we are offering will be a God-send to the providers, clinicians, and facilities on the frontlines of this fight.And later, CMS is going to be issuing guidance directing nursing homes to temporarily restrict all visitors and non-essential personnel, with a few exceptions such as end-of-life situations.We fully appreciate that this measure represents a severe trial for residents of nursing homes and those who love them. But we are doing what we must to protect our vulnerable elderly. Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, Seema.As I said in my address to the nation the other night, all Americans have a role to play in defeating this virus. Our most effective weapon right now is to limit the damage to our people and our country, and slow the spread of the virus itself.The choice we make, the precautions we put into place are critical to overcoming the virus, reducing its spread and shortening the duration of the pandemic, which is what it is.The CDC has published guidelines on the Coronavirus.gov to enable—it’s Coronavirus.gov, and it’s very, very heavily used right now, I will say—to enable every American to respond to this epidemic and to protect themselves, their families, and their communities, while the risks to young and healthy Americans remains very low. We’ve learned a lot about this over the last two weeks. Anyone can be a carrier for the virus and risk transmission to older Americans and those with underlying health conditions and those who are most at risk. They have not done very well. Older Americans who are, especially, if they have a health problem, they have not done well.We must take all precautions and be responsible for the actions that we take and that we see other people take. We want to prevent the spread and transmission of the disease.It’s incredible what’s—sports—what’s happening with the sporting world, where so many of the great sports that we’ve gotten so used to at this time of the year, they’re not going to be meeting. And they’ve done a great service actually. But that—would be another way that it could be—problems could be caused.But this is why I outlined on Wednesday night my admiss...administration’s—the fact that we’ve issued a requirement suspending all medically unnecessary visits to various places, but in particular, nursing homes. We should all be working off the same playbook when it comes to protecting Americans. We have to.We need to be consistent in adopting measures to limit the spread of the virus. The virus is the same, whether it’s spreading in cities, towns, or rural communities. The tools and tactics for attacking it are similar no matter where you go. No matter where you go. You have some hotspots throughout the world right now that people would have never thought possible, and they’re being very seriously affected.Key among these efforts are breaking chains of transmission between people. These measures have been adopted by many companies, universities, and schools. And we want to protect the safety and the health of their employees and their students. I encourage everyone to follow the guidelines we’ve issued by CDC and these commonsense measures. A lot of it is common sense.For the areas where the virus is spreading, the CDC is advising communities to postpone large gatherings, postpone assemblies, social functions, and sporting events; stagger recess and lunch for schools that aren’t canceled; limit in-person meetings; increase scheduled cleanings; and cancel work-sponsored travel—among numerous other steps that can be taken.Americans are the strongest and most resilient people on Earth, and in the coming weeks, we will all have to make changes and sacrifices, but these short-term sacrifices will produce long-term gain.And again, I’ve said we’re learning a lot for the future and future problems like this, or worse. Or worse. It could get worse. The next eight weeks are critical. We can learn—and we will turn a corner on this virus.Some of the doctors say it will wash through, it will flow through. Interesting terms and very accurate. I think you’re going to find in a number of weeks it’s going to be a very accurate term.In times of hardship, the true character of America always shines through. We live in the company of the greatest heroes and the most inspiring citizens anywhere in the world. We want to take care of our people. We want to draw on the strength of our history, draw on the strength of our people, and we will get through this all together. We will just get through it. So much progress has already been made.And, frankly, the numbers—because of steps that have been taken—are at a level that a lot of people are surprised, especially when you compare them with other places with far smaller populations.The spirit and the will of our nation is unbreakable. We will defeat this threat. When America is tested, America rises to the occasion.And to those families and citizens who are worried and concerned for themselves and their loved ones, I want you to know that your federal government will unleash every authority, resource, and tool at its disposal to safeguard the lives and health of our people.So we’re with you every step of the way. No nation is more prepared or more equipped to face down this crisis. As you know, we are rated number one in the world.We’re also helping other nations—many other nations; we’re helping them a lot. And they’re doing okay, in some cases. In some cases, they’re not doing well at all. But we’re working with a lot of groups of people and a lot of other nations.With faith and heart and hope and love and determination, we will succeed. We will prevail. We will be very, very successful. And we’ll learn for the future.Thank you all very much. If you have any questions, we can take some.Go ahead, John. Please. And if you’d like to ask some of the folks up here, it would be fine. Please.Q: Mr. President, where are you with the House bill? Yesterday, we talked to you in the Oval Office; you were opposed to it. What has happened since then? And what’s the holdup on that?THE PRESIDENT: Well, we just don’t think they’re giving enough. We don’t think the Democrats are giving enough. We’re negotiating. We thought we had something, but all of a sudden they didn’t agree to certain things that they agreed to. So we could have something, but we don’t think they’re giving enough. They’re not, they’re not doing what’s right for the country.Q: And if I could ask Dr. Fauci—Q: (Inaudible.)THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. You just mentioned waiving interest for student loans.THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q: You talked about buying oil from the—from the SPR, or adding to the SPR. What other specific targeted measures is your administration thinking about taking? The Treasury Secretary, Steve Mnuchin, said today that you’re just in the “second inning” of things that you might be undergoing.THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, well, that’s true. And we are looking at many different things, as you know. You know some of them, they’ve been written about very widely. But we’re going to be releasing a paper in about two hours stating quite a few other steps. Very important ones.Q: Mr. President—Please, go ahead.Q: Like what, sir, if you wouldn’t mind?THE PRESIDENT: Please, go ahead.Q: Thank you so much, Mr. President. I want to, I want to know if you are in contact with the Brazilian President, Bolsonaro, after a member of his delegation who was with you Saturday was tested positive.And also Senat...I want to ask another question, if you’ll let me. Senator Lindsey Graham and also Senator Scott—Rick Scott—are self-isolating. Are you planning to take any kind of precautionary measure to protect you and also your staff who was there with him?THE PRESIDENT: No, we have no symptoms whatsoever. And we have, we had a great meeting with the President of Brazil, Bolsonaro. Great guy. Very—a very tremendous—he’s done—he’s doing a fantastic job for Brazil.And, as you know, he tested negative—meaning, nothing wrong—this morning. And we got that word, too. Because we did have dinner with him; we were sitting next to each other for a long period of time.Q: But are you in contact with him over the coronavirus crisis?THE PRESIDENT: No, we, we have. We’re talking about it, country to country, but we did discuss if he had a problem. It was reported that he may have it, and he doesn’t, fortunately.Q: Thank you so much, Mr. President. Dr. Fauci said earlier this week that the lag in testing was, in fact, “a failing.” Do you take responsibility for that?And when can you guarantee that every single American who needs a test will be able to have a test? What’s the date of that?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah, no, I don’t take responsibility at all, because we were given a, a set of circumstances and we were given rules, regulations, and specifications from a different time. It wasn’t meant for this kind of an event with the kind of numbers that we’re talking about. And what we’ve done is redesigned it very quickly with the help of the people behind me. And we’re now in very, very strong shape.I think we’ll be announcing, as I said, Sunday night, and this will start very quickly. And we, we’ll have, we’ll have the ability to do in the millions over a very, very quick period of time. So, no.And what we have done—and we are going to be leaving a very indelible print for the future, in case something like this happens again. But it was a—and that’s not the fault of anybody. And, frankly, the old system worked very well for smaller numbers—much smaller numbers—but not for these kind of numbers.Tony, maybe you’d like to say something?Q: By Sunday night, will you have...THE PRESIDENT: Tony, please.Q: Yes, please. By Sunday night, will every American be able to get a test?DR. FAUCI: So, just to reiterate what I said to many of you multiple times: It’s (inaudible) of a system. This system was not designed, for what it was designed for, it worked very well. The CDC designed a good system.If you want to get the kind of blanket testing and availability that anybody can get it or you could even do surveillance to find out what the penetrance is, you have to embrace the private sector.&amp; And this is exactly what you’re seeing, because you can’t do it without it.So when I said that, I meant the system was not designed for what we need. Now, looking forward, the system will take care of it.Q: And, Mr. President, with respect, you’ve been.../p&gt;THE PRESIDENT: And, interestingly, if you go back—please—if you go back to the swine flu, it was nothing like this. They didn’t do testing like this. And actually, they lost approximately 14,000 people. And they didn’t do the testing. They started thinking about testing when it was far too late.What we’ve done—and one of the reasons I think people are respecting what we’ve done: We’ve done it very early. We’ve gotten it very early. And we’ve also kept a lot of people out.Q: Mr. PresidentTHE PRESIDENT: Yes, please. Go ahead. Please.Q: Mr. President, the last administration said that they had tested a million people at this point. You’ve been—THE PRESIDENT: Well, ask them how they...Q: President for three years.THE PRESIDENT: did with the swine flu. It was a disaster.Q: But with respect, you’ve been President for three years...THE PRESIDENT: Next, please. Next, please.Q:—and Wuhan was suffering—THE PRESIDENT: They had a very big failure with swine flu. A very big failure.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. I want to ask you about the European travel ban that goes into effect at...THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q:...midnight tonight and the exemption that you’ve offered to the UK. There are 17 countries that are in the so-called “Schengen zone” that have fewer coronavirus cases than the UK. And just in the past 24 hours, the UK has added 208 coronavirus cases to their total. Why do they, Mr. President, deserve an exemption? And would you consider adding them to this travel ban list?THE PRESIDENT: Well, that was recommended to me by a group of professionals, and we are looking at it based on the new numbers that are coming out. And we may have to include them in the list of countries that we will, you could say, ban—or whatever—it is during this period of time.But, yeah, their numbers have gone up fairly precipitously over the last 24 hours, so we may be adding that, and we may be adding a couple of others. And we may, frankly, start thinking about taking some off.Go ahead.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. I’m a correspondent with Hong Kong Phoenix TV. You have been mentioned, you have mentioned that the number in China has been decreasing and China has made tremendous progress in the past two weeks.THE PRESIDENT: It’s true.Q: I’m wondering how much confidence does this give you to control the virus in the United States. And do you see the data China has been sharing with the United States has been helpful?THE PRESIDENT: I think it has been helpful. We’ve been working very much with China. I’ve spoken, as you know, with President Xi. They went through hell, and their numbers are starting to look very good. They’re really, they’re really looking very good. We’re very happy about that. We are sharing data, yes. In fact, we’re sharing quite a bit of data, including the fact that some of our pharmaceutical companies are working over there right now with large groups of people.Yeah, go ahead. Please.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. You spoke with Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau yesterday.THE PRESIDENT: Yes, I did.Q: Did you discuss the potential closing of the border between Canada and the U.S.? And, by extension, are you considering ways to salvage the $2 billion daily trade between the two countries?THE PRESIDENT: So we didn’t discuss the border. We’ve had a very good relationship. Just about finished with the USMCA, as you know. He called, actually, he called me to tell me that. I think that was the primary reason for the call.At the time, his wife had not been diagnosed. And she’s a lovely lady, wonderful lady, great lady. And since then, I’ve heard, read that the result was that she has it. And I was a little surprised. I think he was surprised also. We did discuss it prior to. She’s going to be fine, but he thought that she would not, most likely, have the virus. Unfortunately, she does.But we didn’t discuss the border yesterday, no.Go ahead, please.If you have any questions for these great geniuses up here, you should—even a business question related to what we’re talking about.Q: Mr. President, Ross Palombo from ABC News Miami. As a relatively new Floridian, what is your message today to the cruise line industry and the travel industry that Florida depends upon? And since Senator Rick Scott and Miami-Dade Mayor Carlos Giménez have the same exposure as you and they are self-isolating, what’s your message to them? That they shouldn’t be?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t know that I had exposure, but I don’t have any of the symptoms. And we do have a White House doctor and, I should say, many White House doctors, frankly. And I asked them that same question, and they said, “You don’t have any symptoms whatsoever.” And we don’t want people without symptoms to go and do the test. The test is not insignificant.As far as the cruise line business, we’re with them all the way. It’s a great business. It’s a great U.S. business, frankly. And I know how important they are to the country. That includes airlines. But the cruise line business, obviously, was hit very hard.We had a tremendous success out in Oakland where we moved it. Vice President Pence did a fantastic job with that. We worked with UK. We worked with Canada. They took their people back. And Canada has approximately 600 people; UK, likewise, took a large number of people back to the United Kingdom.And we have people quarantined. It was a big operation, and it worked out really—you don’t hear about it anymore. It worked out really well.Mike, you may even want to say something about that because that was really done properly.THE VICE PRESIDENT: Well, thank you, Mr. President. And that program with the Grand Princess, the ship, is continuing to be administered in the highest standards, orderly way, as the President directed. And Americans that needed treatment have received them.I spoke to the governor of Iowa today, and some of those who now have been cleared are able, in proper supervision, to be returning to Iowa, where they’re making arrangements for them to do that. Others in Texas, others in Georgia. Again, it’s another example of the extraordinary cooperation of Governor Abbott, Governor Gavin Newsom, Governor Brian Kemp of Georgia.But to add to that, the President directed me last Saturday to travel down to Miami. We met with all the leaders of the cruise line industry. Several cruise lines have announced a 60-day pause in operations. Our Department of Homeland Security has praised them for doing that because of the unique health challenges particularly presented to seniors with underlying conditions.We have a proposal from the cruise line industry, but they’re currently considering what other steps that they might take, perhaps even similar to what those other lines have taken. We’re anticipating some response on that in the next 24 hours.But as the President said, the American people cherish our cruise line industry, the men and women who work on the ships, the men and women who work on the shore, all the economies that are so benefitted by a vibrant cruise line industry.And what the President has directed us to do is, whether there, whether there is a pause in the moment, as some cruise lines are doing, and as we all continue to discuss, we want to work with the cruise line industry to ensure that when we come through this, that cruise lines and the medical services that are available, and for the passengers and all of the crew, that cruise lines are safer than ever before and can prosper for many years to come.THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: This question is for Drs. Fauci and Birk [sic] Birx. Dr. Fauci, based on what you currently know, what is the trajectory for when this outbreak will peak? How long will the American people have to remain on this emergency footing?And for Dr. Birx, as the administration tries to get its arms around this test kit shortage issue, the next glaring need could be respirators and related hospital equipment. So what is the administration doing right now to ramp up production of respirators and that kind of equipment should this outbreak persist?DR. FAUCI: So, when you have an outbreak like this, particularly if you’re trying to interfere with it, it’s really impossible to predict the time element of when it’s going to peak and when it’s naturally going to go down.So if you look at the situation where countries really did not get to the point of trying to contain and mitigate very well, you see a peak over several weeks and then down again over other several weeks. What we’re trying to do with the efforts that we’re doing is to blunt that peak.And I mentioned it many times, and I think it’s important and appropriate for me to mention it again because it answers your question: When you talk about preventing infections from without in—which is the kind of travel restrictions we’re talking about—then how do you handle what you already have in your country? You continue some sort of containment, but you also do mitigation and you try to proportion it to the areas where there are the most infections.The success of that and how much you make this turn into this is going to give you the amount of time. If we’re successful, it’ll be less. If we’re not successful, it’s going to be more. But these kind of things generally run out in a few months. Hopefully, we’ll make it several weeks—eight, nine, whatever weeks. But I can’t give you a number because it depends on how successful we are.DR. BIRX: Great, thank you. It’s a great question, and Dr. Fauci and I have worked together a very long time and continue. It’s a privilege to work with him every day.So I think you can learn very—and I appreciate there were some graphics done by some of the reporting over the last several days. If you align the data from China with the data with South Korea, you can start to see almost a complete overlay of that data. And so that’s what we’re tracking very closely, as well as Italy. But you have an excellent question.I just want to make one note: In South Korea, I want to repeat, only 4 percent of the tests were positive. That means 96 percent of the people had a different respiratory disease because we’re in the middle of flu season, cold season, and all of the other respiratory diseases that we get every day.In LabCorp and Quest’s early data, they’re running about 1 to 2 percent positive. That means that we have a lot more other respiratory disease out there besides the coronavirus. And that’s why the screening is critical. But even with the screening, we’re going to low, run what we think are very low rates.Needless to say, though, we’re taking it extraordinarily seriously to plan for what could come. Not what Dr. Fauci talked about—blunting the curve—that makes it much less high need at that peak of the curve that we’re all planning for.So we’re in full inventory of all of our assets by the President unlocking and this emergency order, and the Secretary of HHS’s ability—it unlocks all of those stockpiles, those needs: what the VA has, what the DOD has, what the National Guard has, and what every hospital has.And the hospital emergency preparedness plan allows them to defer elective issues to keep those hospital beds open for those who might need it. So we’re in full planning mode for each of those things.THE PRESIDENT: And I might add that we’re in the process—and, in some cases, have already done it—ordered a large number of respirators, just in case. We hope we don’t need them, but we’ve ordered a large number.Yeah. Go ahead, please.Q: Thank you very much, Mr. President. In your speech to the nation, you mentioned the situation in China and South Korea have improved, and you’re thinking about remove the restrictions, also the warning...THE PRESIDENT: Right.Q:...in place right now. When can we expect that announcement? And how do you see the overall progress that Asian countries made?THE PRESIDENT: Well, some are making progress; some are not, as you know. But some are making progress. And as they make progress, as they get down to the number that we all think is right—that they know is right, we know is right—we’ll be opening it up. And some are really moving along rapidly. We hope to be able to open things up as quickly as possible.Go ahead, please. Go ahead.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. I’d like to ask Secretary Azar and Dr. Fauzi [sic] just how...THE PRESIDENT: That was (inaudible). (Laughs.)Q: Dr. Fauci. Okay?THE PRESIDENT: Right. Better.Q: All right.THE PRESIDENT: Better. Not 100 percent, but 90 percent.Q: Right.THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.Q: This affects the elderly, primarily. And in that sense, it’s an unusual disease. Is any specific research being done as to why it affects our senior citizens more than others?DR. FAUCI: So, I don’t mean to diminish your question, but we already know why it would affect senior citizens more, because when you talk about anything that requires a robust immune system—as you get older, your immune system is not as potent as it is when you were young. And that’s the reason why, when you talk about even influenza, which we have extraordinary experience with over decades and decades, the people who are very vulnerable are the elderly and those with underlying conditions.The same thing holds true for a variety of other disease. Why cancer is more prevalent in some—in mostly in older individuals—because the immune system that screens for it is less robust. So it really is something that is kind of well-known over a lot of studies.THE PRESIDENT: Okay. OAN, please. OAN.Q: Mr. President, the Chinese officials are expressing some tones of discontent with how—where the source of this virus has come from, and they’re spinning some odd narratives. What are your response to the Chinese officials who are doing that? And have they signaled any kind of resistance to upcoming trade talks in response to how we’re handling this virus?THE PRESIDENT: No, we have our deal with China. They’re going to be buying $250 billion worth of goods and $50 billion from our farmers. And that’s a great deal for our country; it’s about time somebody did that. And, frankly, phase two, we’ll start negotiating.I did read one article, but I don’t think that article was representative, certainly not of my conversations with President Xi, and they know where it came from. We all know where it came from.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Yamiche Alcindor from PBS NewsHour.THE PRESIDENT: Yes.Q: My first question is: You said that you don’t take responsibility, but you did disband the White House pandemic office, and the officials that were working in that office left this administration abruptly. So what responsibility do you take to that? And the officials that worked in that office said that you, that the White House lost valuable time because that office was disbanded. What do you make of that?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I just think it’s a nasty question because what we’ve done is—and Tony has said numerous times that we’ve saved thousands of lives because of the quick closing. And when you say “me,” I didn’t do it. We have a group of people I could...Q: It’s your administration.THE PRESIDENT: I could ask perhaps—my administration—but I could perhaps ask Tony about that because I don’t know anything about it. I mean, you say, you say we did that. I don’t know anything about it.Q: You don’t know about the...THE PRESIDENT: We’re spending—I don’t know. It’s the...Q:...about the reorganization that happened at the National Security Council?THE PRESIDENT: It’s the, it’s the administration. Perhaps they do that.vYou know, people let people go. You used to be with a different newspaper than you are now. You know, things like that happen.Q: But this was a, this was an org-...THE PRESIDENT: Okay. Please go ahead.Q: This was an organization at the National Security Council.THE PRESIDENT: We’re doing a great job. Let me tell you, these professionals behind me and the—these great, incredible doctors and business people—the best in the world. And I can say that. Whether it’s retailers or labs, or anything you want to say, these are the best of the world. We’re doing a great job.We have 40 people right now. Forty. Compare that with other countries that have many, many times that amount. And one of the reasons we have 40 and others have—and, again, that number is going up, just so you understand. And a number of cases, which are very small, relatively speaking, it’s going up. But we’ve done a great job because we acted quickly. We acted early. And there’s nothing we could have done that was better than closing our borders to highly infected areas.Please, go ahead.Q: Thank you, Mr. President. Vanessa Jaklitsch for NTN24 for Latin America countries...THE PRESIDENT: Yes, sure.Q:...and also for Spain, La Razón and Antena 3. I would like to ask you two very brief questions. One: For how long we’re going to have the emergency—I mean, the national emergency? And...THE PRESIDENT: I hope not long, but it’s there now and it gives tremendous powers for things that we need. Tremendous power, actually. And the Stafford Act and various other things that we’re involved with and have studied and memorized in so many different ways and forms, it gives the kind of power that we need to get rid of this virus.And we’re going to do it very quickly. And I hope we won’t need it very long, but whatever it takes.Q: So, for now, we still don’t know for how long? And I, something very important I wanted to ask you is like, how do you think, do you really think it’s essential coordinating with other countries, and learning from the lessons that, they already suffer the same situation, countries...THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q:...of course, like China and South Korea, but now recently...THE PRESIDENT: Sure.Q:...Italy and Spain. And how...THE PRESIDENT: Well, Italy is having a...Q:...is that coordination done? Thank you so much, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Italy is having a very, yeah, we’re in touch with Italy and, you know, it’s a, it’s a country that we love.&amp; We have tremendous—millions and millions of people, originally—origins from Italy. And we’re working with them. They’re in a very, they’re in, probably, relatively speaking, the toughest position of all.We’re in touch with everybody. We’re in touch with—when I say “everybody,” we’re in touch with many of the countries that you know about, that you’re writing about. And they’re calling us asking for advice. They’re asking for the advice of the people behind me.Italy has got a tough situation, but they’re, they’re really, they have really clamped down and I think they’re going to see some very good results. It’s tough. What they did, they really took their medicine, but they’re going to see some much better results.Yeah, Jeff.Q: Thank you, sir. With regard to domestic travel: Should Americans feel safe or should Americans at all be traveling to states such as Washington State, New York, and other hotspots within this country?And a follow-up on Brazil: You’re asking people who come back from America—from Europe—Americans who are coming back from Europe to self-quarantine for a couple weeks. You were in a picture with somebody who now has coronavirus from Brazil, at Mar-a-Lago. How is that different?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I’ll tell you, first of all, I’m not coming back from someplace.Q: But you were exposed.THE PRESIDENT: We, and there was somebody that they say has it. I have no idea who he is, but I take pictures and it lasts for, literally, seconds. I don’t know the gentleman that we’re talking about. I have no idea who he is. I haven’t seen the picture. I said, “There’s a picture of somebody,” but I take sometimes hundreds of pictures a day. And that night I was taking hundreds of pictures. So I just don’t know.Now I did sit with the President for probably two hours, but he has tested negative. So that’s good.Q: It’s just a matter of...THE PRESIDENT: Please, go ahead.Q: And the domestic travel, sir?THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead, please.Q: The travel? The first part of the question was domestic travel.THE PRESIDENT: I would say, if you stay home, it’s not bad. It’s not bad. Now, there are certain parts of the country that are, essentially, have no, have zero problem. Washington has been very tough, in particular, a nursing home. And, but Washington, the State of Washington has been very tough. It’s been a big percentage of—when you talk about the 40 deaths, that’s been has been a big percentage of the deaths, as you know very well. And they all came from a very certain area, unfortunately.Please, go ahead.Q: Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead. Okay.Q: Thank you very much, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Yes.Q: Cordelia Lynch, Sky News. You talked this week about the UK doing a good job in tackling coronavirus. In light of the rising cases, are you changing your mind about that? You also just spoke about possible travel restrictions. Have you discussed when they might be put in place?THE PRESIDENT: Well, in light of the results, as we discussed before, in light of the results, we’re going to be looking at it. And I know the task force is looking at it very strongly—the Vice President, everybody. It was looking good, but they’ve, the results have been building up pretty rapidly. So we’ll, we’ll be taking another look at that. Yes, absolutely.Go ahead, please.Q: Mr. President, thank you. I want to first follow up on Jeff’s question, because the person you were standing next to, whether you know who he is or not, tested positive for coronavirus. Dr. Fauci said this morning, “If you stand next to somebody who tested positive, you should self-isolate and get a test.” You say your White House doctor is telling you something different. Who should Americans listen to?And my second question is...THE PRESIDENT: I think they have to listen to their doctors, and I think they shouldn’t be jumping to get the test unless it’s necessary. But I think they have to listen to their doctors. And I mean, I don’t know the, I haven’t seen the picture. Somebody said there’s a picture with somebody taking a picture with me, but I haven’t seen it. But I can tell you...Q: Well, doctors have said you might have it even if you don’t have symptoms.THE PRESIDENT: Well...Q: Are you being selfish by not getting tested and potentially exposing...THE PRESIDENT: Well, I didn’t say I wasn’t going to be tested.Q: Are you going to be?THE PRESIDENT: Most likely, yeah. Most likely.Q: When do you think that will happen?THE PRESIDENT: Not for that reason, but because I think I will do it any way. Fairly soon.Q: Will you let us know the results?THE PRESIDENT: We’re working on that. We’re working out a schedule.Q: My second question, Mr. President...THE PRESIDENT: You go ahead, please.Q: That was a follow-up.THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead.Q: (Inaudible.) (Off-mic.)THE PRESIDENT: Yeah.Q: I know there’s been a lot of talk about testing. I just want to make sure we’re clear though, because we’ve been hearing from doctors who say, as of today, they still can’t get patients tested who need a test. So, as of today, can everyone who a doctor wants to have tested get tested? And if not, when? When will doctors...THE PRESIDENT: Well, that’s been true for a while. But I’ll let Mike—why don’t you answer that, Mike, please?THE VICE PRESIDENT: Well, as the President said and Dr. Fauci has articulated, the nature of our current system—where the CDC has sample sent and tests are performed or state labs perform tests or, in some cases, university and hospital labs perform tests—is generally adequate for an infectious disease or for people getting diagnostic work done. But given the sheer scale of this, the President tasked us with bringing together this extraordinary public and private partnership.Today, by some estimates, when you add all the labs together and, today, the President made it possible for every state in the country and their state labs to authorize labs across their state to do coronavirus testing.We, we’re estimating somewhere between 15- and 20,000 tests a day are able to be performed. But very soon, with the program that was announced today, Americans will be able to visit one of the sites closest to them, as described on the website, if they’re symptomatic—if the questionnaire indicates it—to be able to have a test there. And these incredible companies will process the test and they’ll receive that information.But, for now, the best advice that we can give for people is to speak to their doctor, as the President just said. And if the doctor indicates, that physician—if it’s not a university hospital or otherwise authorized lab—can contact the state lab. And, again, every state lab in the country can perform tests today.But what the President charged us with, when I was tasked to take over the White House Coronavirus Task Force, was: Open up tests all across the country. And the President said, a few days ago, that we made it clear that any American that wanted to get a test would be able, clinically, to get a test. Because I literally heard from the Governor of Washington State, who said the doctors in Washington State were saying that if you were only mildly symptomatic, they would not order a test. And fortunately, the President directed CDC to clarify that.Now anyone in consultation with their physician, regardless of their symptoms can request a test and their doctors will contact those agencies, those labs in their state. But very soon, Americans will be able to go to these, these drive-in sites and be able to obtain and participate in a test.Dr. Birx, is there more to amplify that?DR. BIRX: No, I think, I think that’s perfectly said. I think, just to review one more time about the testing: With LabCorp and Quest—I think many of you have been to a doctor’s office and seen the little boxes outside—what they do is they deliver both the specimen collection piece—because, remember, it’s a nasal swab; it’s not a tube of blood. So they’ve delivered that to doctors’ offices and hospitals, and then they will arrange to pick that up.The important piece in this all is they’ve gone from a machine that may have a lower throughput, to the potential to have automated extraction. I know you don’t want all of these details, but it’s really key for the laboratory people. It’s an automated extraction of the RNA that then runs in an automated way on the machine, with no one touching it, and the result comes out at the other end.So, sample to machine to results. That cuts out a lot of the manual pieces that were happening that were delaying the test results.Q: And so, with that, what’s the timeline, like from when you’re tested to when you get results? Like, next week, what should people expect?DR. BIRX: Well, with the prior testing, it was taking several days because the test is slower. We believe with this test, because of its throughput, that the testing can be from start—remember, it has to transport—to the laboratory that will run it. And then we’re hoping that all can be finished within 24 hours, which is very similar to other tests that you receive today.These are not point-of-care tests. We are working on point-of-care tests, but we have to realize point-of-care tests take six months or more to develop. So we’re not waiting for those. We’re still diagnosing this on nucleic acid, so as an antibody. This is actually the antigen, the actual virus in your nose that we’re amplifying.THE PRESIDENT: I think you have to remember, though: We’re working very closely with states, and you have a smaller form and more targeted form of government going in and doing it, like, in New York, where the relationship is very good; like Gavin Newsom, where he made some very complimentary—because that’s California—he made some really complimentary comments the other day about how we’re working together. We worked on the ship together, but we worked on a lot of other things together, having to do with this.And we’re, well, really, the relationship that we have, I can’t think of a bad relationship. We’re helping them. We’re funding them, in some cases, depending on what it is you’re talking about. And we’re all working together very closely. So we’ve done, really, I think a tremendous job of teamwork with the different states.All right. One or two more. And if you have, if you have questions for these folks—does anybody have a question for the folks up here? Who has a question up here? You have? Okay, go ahead. If you have a question, go ahead.Q: Thank you I have one for you as well.THE PRESIDENT: Okay. I thought — I knew you would.Q: (Laughs.) No, but I do have one for them, because I haven’t heard this yet.THE PRESIDENT: I was waiting for that. Go ahead.Q: Because I haven’t heard this yet.THE PRESIDENT: Ask them first, please.Q: Yes, I will. Okay. With regards to the CEOs, can you please tell us when you expect to see items like hand sanitizer that have been going out of stock very quickly back on the shelves? There have been a lot of reports about that.And, for you, Mr. President, could you talk about a potential bailout for the cruise industry? You had suggested that could happen. Is that something you’re still looking at? And how much would that be?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I didn’t suggest that it could happen, but I can tell you it’s an industry that was very badly impacted by what’s going on with the virus. And it’s a great industry. It’s a very important industry and we will be helping them. And we will be helping the airline industry, if we have to, assuming we have to.So far, people haven’t been asking. But if they should be asking, we’ll, we want to make sure our airlines are very strong. And then, one day, and one day, all of a sudden, it wasn’t looking so good.Interestingly, we were just talking, I was talking to Doug, and the numbers they’re doing from the retailing standpoint, I guess, because of this, your business is like the opposite. All of you have done—you’ve been selling a lot of—a lot of stuff. Do you want to answer the question, as to the hand sanitizers?MR. MCMILLON: Sure. Yeah, specifically the areas where we’re seeing pressure in the supply chain are surface cleaners, cleaning supplies, paper goods, in particular. Hand sanitizer is going to be very difficult to have 100 percent in stock on for some time. We’re still replenishing it and shipping it, but as soon as it hits the stores, it’s going. The same thing is true for the categories I just mentioned. So all of the retailers will be working hand-in-hand with the suppliers to bring that to the market as fast as we can.Q: What is your advice though for Americans who are seeking those items? What is your advice? They’re selling out online. They’re selling out in the stores. What...MR. MCMILLON: I think, I think this team has given you other examples of what people can do to fight back against this virus, and you should look at the entire list.THE PRESIDENT: Please.DR. FAUCI: Please. I mean, obviously, it sounds very simplistic, but wash your hands as often as you possibly can. And I know you’re not always in a position to be able to wash your hands, but wash them as much as you can. If you don’t have the alcohol wipes, try and get them. If you can’t get them, just try as best as possible to do it. I mean you got to do the best you can.THE PRESIDENT: Alex, please.SECRETARY AZAR: Well, just general preparedness. You know, you want to wash your hands. You want to keep distance from people. And if you’re around someone sick, keep away from them. Just basic, basic public health.No, these guys are selling a lot of toilet paper. I don’t know, there seems — Tony, do you need to give some guidance that toilet paper is not an effective protection against getting the coronavirus? (Laughs.) They’re selling out. But the soap and water. Hot water, soap, 20 seconds. That’s how you do it.THE PRESIDENT: Okay. One more. Go ahead. Go ahead. No. Over here. Behind you. Behind you.Q: Thank you very much, Mr. President. You have a great team, of course.THE PRESIDENT: That’s true. Thank you.Q: My question is to Mr. President: Are you happy from the Chinese response? What correctly really told you, what really happened those days?And second, Prime Minister Modi, or India, have closed borders until April 15th. If you have spoken with the Prime Minister of India, and if they have needed any help?And finally, sir, any message for the small businesses? Because they are losing some businesses because of this. Thank you, sir.THE PRESIDENT: Well, on small businesses, the Small Business Administration is now stacked with money to help them, and we’re going to make the money readily available if they need it, small businesses.We had a great time in India. It was an incredible two days, and he’s a great friend of mine. And he’s a friend of his people, because he was greeted incredibly warmly, as was I And that stadium, that was an incredible event. And I loved being with him, so just say hello to him. But we, we talked about everything. We talked about far more than just borders.And as far as President Xi, likewise, he’s a friend of mine. I believe that we are dealing in good faith. And we just worked to, as you know, and as I just said, we just worked an incredible deal. A big deal. One of the biggest deals ever made of any kind. Big even by the standards of some of the people here, the deal with China. But I think that they want to get to the bottom of things also.We’re working—our drug companies, our pharmaceutical companies are working very closely with China and with India, as you know, and with, all over the world. And they’re all over the world. These are magnificent companies that are very, very knowledgeable.And it’s, we’re very lucky to have them, because I think you’re going to come up with — whether it’s therapeutic or whether it’s just help, helping getting better. And then ultimately, a vaccine, which takes a little bit longer because of the test periods and a couple of other reasons. You’re going to have it very quickly because of the great knowledge. And they’ll have it very quickly. They’ve made a tremendous amount of progress.Thank you all very much. We appreciate it. Thank you. Thank you very much. My fellow Americans: Tonight, I want to speak with you about our nation’s unprecedented response to the coronavirus outbreak that started in China and is now spreading throughout the world.Today, the World Health Organization officially announced that this is a global pandemic.We have been in frequent contact with our allies, and we are marshalling the full power of the federal government and the private sector to protect the American people.This is the most aggressive and comprehensive effort to confront a foreign virus in modern history.I am confident that by counting and continuing to take these tough measures, we will significantly reduce the threat to our citizens, and we will ultimately and expeditiously defeat this virus.From the beginning of time, nations and people have faced unforeseen challenges, including large-scale and very dangerous health threats.This is the way it always was and always will be. It only matters how you respond, and we are responding with great speed and professionalism.Our team is the best anywhere in the world.At the very start of the outbreak, we instituted sweeping travel restrictions on China and put in place the first federally mandated quarantine in over 50 years.We declared a public health emergency and issued the highest level of travel warning on other countries as the virus spread its horrible infection.And taking early intense action, we have seen dramatically fewer cases of the virus in the United States than are now present in Europe.The European Union failed to take the same precautions and restrict travel from China and other hotspots.As a result, a large number of new clusters in the United States were seeded by travelers from Europe.After consulting with our top government health professionals, I have decided to take several strong but necessary actions to protect the health and wellbeing of all Americans.To keep new cases from entering our shores, we will be suspending all travel from Europe to the United States for the next 30 days.The new rules will go into effect Friday at midnight.These restrictions will be adjusted subject to conditions on the ground.There will be exemptions for Americans who have undergone appropriate screenings, and these prohibitions will not only apply to the tremendous amount of trade and cargo, but various other things as we get approval.Anything coming from Europe to the United States is what we are discussing.These restrictions will also not apply to the United Kingdom.At the same time, we are monitoring the situation in China and in South Korea.And, as their situation improves, we will reevaluate the restrictions and warnings that are currently in place for a possible early opening.Earlier this week, I met with the leaders of health insurance industry who have agreed to waive all copayments for coronavirus treatments, extend insurance coverage to these treatments, and to prevent surprise medical billing.We are cutting massive amounts of red tape to make antiviral therapies available in record time.These treatments will significantly reduce the impact and reach of the virus.Additionally, last week, I signed into law an $8.3 billion funding bill to help CDC and other government agencies fight the virus and support vaccines, treatments, and distribution of medical supplies.Testing and testing capabilities are expanding rapidly, day by day.We are moving very quickly.The vast majority of Americans: The risk is very, very low.Young and healthy people can expect to recover fully and quickly if they should get the virus.The highest risk is for elderly population with underlying health conditions.The elderly population must be very, very careful.In particular, we are strongly advising that nursing homes for the elderly suspend all medically unnecessary visits.In general, older Americans should also avoid nonessential travel in crowded areas.My administration is coordinating directly with communities with the largest outbreaks, and we have issued guidance on school closures, social distancing, and reducing large gatherings.Smart action today will prevent the spread of the virus tomorrow.Every community faces different risks and it is critical for you to follow the guidelines of your local officials who are working closely with our federal health experts—and they are the best.For all Americans, it is essential that everyone take extra precautions and practice good hygiene.Each of us has a role to play in defeating this virus.Wash your hands, clean often-used surfaces, cover your face and mouth if you sneeze or cough, and most of all, if you are sick or not feeling well, stay home.To ensure that working Americans impacted by the virus can stay home without fear of financial hardship, I will soon be taking emergency action, which is unprecedented, to provide financial relief.This will be targeted for workers who are ill, quarantined, or caring for others due to coronavirus.I will be asking Congress to take legislative action to extend this relief.Because of the economic policies that we have put into place over the last three years, we have the greatest economy anywhere in the world, by far.Our banks and financial institutions are fully capitalized and incredibly strong.Our unemployment is at a historic low.This vast economic prosperity gives us flexibility, reserves, and resources to handle any threat that comes our way.This is not a financial crisis, this is just a temporary moment of time that we will overcome together as a nation and as a world.However, to provide extra support for American workers, families, and businesses, tonight I am announcing the following additional actions:I am instructing the Small Business Administration to exercise available authority to provide capital and liquidity to firms affected by the coronavirus.Effective immediately, the SBA will begin providing economic loans in affected states and territories.These low-interest loans will help small businesses overcome temporary economic disruptions caused by the virus.To this end, I am asking Congress to increase funding for this program by an additional $50 billion.Using emergency authority, I will be instructing the Treasury Department to defer tax payments, without interest or penalties, for certain individuals and businesses negatively impacted.This action will provide more than $200 billion of additional liquidity to the economy.Finally, I am calling on Congress to provide Americans with immediate payroll tax relief.Hopefully they will consider this very strongly.We are at a critical time in the fight against the virus.We made a life-saving move with early action on China.Now we must take the same action with Europe.We will not delay.I will never hesitate to take any necessary steps to protect the lives, health, and safety of the American people.I will always put the wellbeing of America first.If we are vigilant—and we can reduce the chance of infection, which we will—we will significantly impede the transmission of the virus.The virus will not have a chance against us.No nation is more prepared or more resilient than the United States.We have the best economy, the most advanced healthcare, and the most talented doctors, scientists, and researchers anywhere in the world.We are all in this together.We must put politics aside, stop the partisanship, and unify together as one nation and one family.As history has proven time and time again, Americans always rise to the challenge and overcome adversity.Our future remains brighter than anyone can imagine.Acting with compassion and love, we will heal the sick, care for those in need, help our fellow citizens, and emerge from this challenge stronger and more unified than ever before.God bless you, and God bless America.Thank you. Well, thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you. Wow. (Applause.) Well, thank you very much, everybody. Wow. We’ve all been through a lot together, and we probably deserve that hand for all of us, because it’s been a very unfair situation.I invited some of our very good friends. And we have limited room, but everybody wanted to come. We kept it down to a minimum. And believe it or not, this is a minimum.But a tremendous thing was done over the last number of months, but really, if you go back to it, over the last number of years. We had the witch hunt. It started from the day we came down the elevator, myself and our future First Lady, who’s with us right now. Thank you, Melania. (Applause.)And it never really stopped. We’ve been going through this now for over three years. It was evil. It was corrupt. It was dirty cops. It was leakers and liars. And this should never, ever happen to another President ever. I don’t know that other Presidents would have been able to take it. Some people said, no, they wouldn’t have. But I can tell you, at a minimum, you have to focus on this because it can get away very quickly. No matter who you have with you, it can get away very quickly. It was a disgrace.Had I not fired James Comey — who was a disaster, by the way — it’s possible I wouldn’t even be standing here right now. We caught him in the act. Dirty cops. Bad people. If this happened to President Obama, a lot of people would have been in jail for a long time already. Many, many years.I want to start by thanking some of — and I call them friends, because, you know, you develop friendships and relationships when you’re in battle and war, much more so than, “Gee, let’s have a normal situation.”With all that we’ve gone through, we’ve done, I think, more than any President and administration, and really, I say, for the most part, Republican congressmen, congresswomen, and Republican senators. We’ve done more than any administration in the first few years, if you look at all of the things we’ve done.I watched this morning as they tried to take credit for the stock market from — (laughter) — from — think of that. Let me tell you, if we didn’t win, the stock market would have crashed. And the market was going up a lot before the election because it was looking we had a good chance to win, and then it went up tremendously from the time we won the election until the time we took office, which was November 8th to January 20th. And that’s our credit. That’s all our credit. And leading up to that point was our credit because there was hope.And one of the reasons the stock market has gone up so much in the last few days is people think we’re doing so well. They liked the State of the Union speech. (Applause.) It really is — it’s a true honor to give it.Making the State of the Union speech, I was with some people that have been around; they’ve been all over the world. And one of them, a highly sophisticated person, said, “You know, no matter where you go in the world, it doesn’t make any difference — there is nothing like what I witnessed tonight.” The beauty, the majesty of the Chamber. The power of the United States, the power of the people in this room.Really, an amazing — I don’t think there is anything like that anywhere in the world. You can go to any other country, you can go to any other location, any other place. It’s the beauty of everything. It’s what it represents and how it represents our country.I want to start by introducing some of the people that are here. I know some are going to be left out. But they work so hard. And this is really not a news conference. It’s not a speech. It’s not anything. It’s just we’re sort of — it’s a celebration, because we have something that just worked out. I mean, it worked out. We went through hell, unfairly. Did nothing wrong. Did nothing wrong. I’ve done things wrong in my life, I will admit. (Laughter.) Not purposely, but I’ve done things wrong. But this is what the end result is. (Applause.)(The President holds up the front cover of The Washington Post newspaper.)We can take that home, Honey. Maybe we’ll frame it. (Laughter.) It’s the only good headline I’ve ever had in the Washington Post, I’ll tell you. (Laughter.) But every paper is the same. Does anybody have those papers? Does anybody have them? Because they’re really like that. So I appreciate that.But some of the people here have been incredible warriors. They’re warriors. And there’s nothing, from a legal standpoint — this is a political thing. And every time, I’d say, “This is unfair. Let’s go to court.” They’d say, “Sir, you can’t go to court. This is politics.” And we were treated unbelievably unfairly.And you have to understand, we first went through Russia, Russia, Russia. It was all bullshit. (Laughter.) We then went through the Mueller report. And they should have come back one day later. They didn’t. They came back two years later, after lives were ruined, after people went bankrupt, after people lost all their money.People came to Washington to help other people. “Bright-eyed and bushy-tailed,” I say. They came — one or two or three people in particular, but many people.We had a rough campaign. It was nasty. It was one of the nastiest, they say. They say Andrew Jackson was always the nastiest campaign. They actually said we topped it. (Laughter.) It was a nasty — it was a nasty — both in the primaries and in the — in the election.But, you see, we thought, after the election, it would stop. But it didn’t stop; it just started. And tremendous corruption. Tremendous corruption.So we had a campaign. Little did we know we were running against some very, very bad and evil people with fake dossiers, with all of these horrible, dirty cops that took these dossiers and did bad things. They knew all about it. The FISA courts should be ashamed of themselves.It’s a very tough thing. And then we ended up winning on Russia, Russia, Russia. It should have taken the one day, as I said, and it took years.Then Bob Mueller testified. That didn’t work out so well for the other side. (Laughter.) But they should have said, that first week — because it came out. Is that right, Jim Jordan? They knew in the first two days actually. Devin, is that right? Two days. They knew that we were totally innocent.But they kept it going, Mark. They kept it going forever because they wanted to inflict political pain on somebody that had just won an election that, to — a lot of people were surprised. I mean, we had polls that said we were going to win. We had Los Angeles Times and a few — a few papers, actually, said it was — we were going to win but it was going to be close.And we did win. It was one of the greatest wins of all time. And they said, “Okay, he won.” And, you know, I wrote this down because that was where a thing called the “insurance policy” — to me, when I saw the insurance policy — and that was done long before the election. That was done when they thought that Hillary Clinton was going to win.And, by the way, Hillary Clinton and the DNC paid for millions — millions of dollars — the fake dossier. And now Christopher Steele admits that it’s a fake because he got sued by rich people. I should have sued him too. But when you’re President, people don’t like suing.I want to thank my legal team, by the way — not for that advice, but for other advice. (Applause.) Pat, Jay. Pat. You guys stand up, please. (Applause.) Great job. (Applause.)Right at the beginning, they said, “Sir, you have nothing to worry about. All of the facts are on your side.” I said, “You don’t understand. That doesn’t matter. That doesn’t matter.” And that was really true.They made up facts. A corrupt politician named Adam Schiff made up my statement to the Ukrainian president. He brought it out of thin air. Just made it up. They say he’s a screenwriter — a failed screenwriter. He tried to go into — unfortunately, he went into politics after that. (Laughter.) Remember he said the statement, which is a mob statement: “Don’t call me. I’ll call you.” I didn’t say that.Fortunately, for all of us here today and for our country, we had transcripts. We had transcribers — professional transcribers. Then they said, “Oh, well, maybe the transcription is not correct.” But Lieutenant Colonel Vindman and his twin brother — right? — we had some people that — really amazing.But we did everything. We said, “What’s wrong with it?” “Well, they didn’t add this word or that one.” It didn’t matter. I said, “Add it. They’re probably wrong, but add it.”So now everyone agrees that they were perfectly accurate. When you read those transcripts, Tim Scott — I don’t know if Tim is here, but he said, “Sir…” He was the first one to call me. “Sir, I read the transcript. You did nothing wrong.” And, Mitch, he stayed there, right from the beginning. He never changed.And, Mitch McConnell, I want to tell you: You did a fantastic job. (Applause.) Somebody said, “You know, Mitch is quiet.” I said, “He’s not quiet. He’s not quiet.” These are the — he doesn’t want people to know him. And they said, “Is Mitch smart?” I said, “Well, let’s put it this way: For many, many years, a lot of very smart — bad, in many cases, sometimes good — but people have been trying to take his place. And to the best of my knowledge, I’ve never even heard the subject come up, because they’ve been wiped out so fast. (Laughter.) This guy is great, and I appreciate it, Mitch. (Applause.)And he’s also given us 191 now. (Applause.) A hundred and ninety-one federal judges. Two Supreme Court judges, right? It’s up to 191. (Applause.) True.Great guy. Great guy. He’s a tough guy to read. I’m good at reading people. A tough guy to read. I’d call him. My wife would say, “How did you do with Mitch?” “Uhh, I don’t know.” (Laughter.) That’s what makes him good — when you can read somebody. Fantastic job.And he understood, rightfully, that this was crooked politics. This was crooked politics. How about all these people, they’re running for office. They’re saying the worst things about me, like eight senators on the Democrat side. Most of them got wiped out. You know, they got their 1 percent or less. Most of them got less. They decided to go home. “Let’s go back to California.” Let’s go back to wherever they came from. “Let’s go back to New York.”How about that one? Our New York senator, Gillibrand. “Let’s go back to New York,” after they get nothing. And then they take an oath that they will be fair, that they will be reason- — and all of the different things. And they had to sign. They’re not fair.But here’s the beauty: So we have four left. They’re saying the most horrendous things about me. It’s okay, it’s politics. And then they’re supposed to vote — on me. They’re trying to replace me, and then they’re supposed to be voting. So I think it’s — I mean, I think it’s incredible.But — so, Mitch, I want to thank you very much. Incredible. And you have some of your folks here, and they’re incredible people — and they’ve been, right from the beginning.And, again, you’re out of session. Unfortunately, I didn’t — you know, I only told these folks, “Let’s do this today.” We did a prayer breakfast this morning, and I thought that was really good. In fact, that was so good it might wipe this out. But by the end — by the time we finished this, we’ll wipe that one out — those statements. (Laughter.)I had — I had Nancy Pelosi sitting four seats away, and I’m saying things that a lot of people wouldn’t have said — (laughter) — but I meant every — (laughter) — I meant every word of it.But we have some of the folks that are going to be leaving right after this, and they work hard — and they did work hard. Bill Cassidy, Senator. Stand up, Bill. What a guy. (Applause.) Great man. When I need to know about health insurance and preexisting conditions and individual mandates, I call Bill or I call Barrasso. We get those two guys; they know more than anybody.A man who just became a senator — he’s a little bit like me; we have a couple of them. A very successful guy in business, and he said, “What the hell, I’ll run for the Senate” — from Indiana. And he ran. And I saw him on television, destroying his opponent in a debate. I said, “You know, this guy could win.” And I got behind him. And, Mike Braun, you have done some great job. Thank you very much. (Applause.) Tough. Tough. Thank you.A man who got James Comey to choke, and he was just talking in his regular voice. He is the roughest man. He’s actually an unbelievable — and I appreciate the letter you sent me today. I just got it. But he’s got this voice that scares people. (Laughter.) You know, people from Iowa can be very tough. We’re doing very well in Iowa.But I’ll tell you, Chuck Grassley — he’s looking at Comey: “Well, you tell me, what did you say?” (Laughter.) Now, he wasn’t being rough. That was just the way he talked. (Laughter.) And that was when Comey — I think that was when Comey announced that he was leaking, lying, and everything else, right? He choked because he never heard anybody talk like that. (Laughter.)You know, you should have gone — I wish you got angry. You could have gotten the whole ballgame. He would have said, “I give up.” (Laughter.) Chuck Grassley is an incredible guy. (Applause.)And a man who — you know, he was running against a tough, smart campaign and we learned how good she was, right? She was a great campaigner. In fact, by the end of the campaign, she was actually — I thought she was more for me than you were, Josh. I was worried. (Laughter.) I saw her ad; she was saying the greatest things about me. And you know who I’m talking about.And I went to a great place — Missouri — and I said, “Who do you have to beat her?” And they said, “Well, we have four people.” I said, “Let me see them. I’m got to interview…” — can you imagine? I’m interviewing people for the United States Senate. This is what I do. Where have I gone? But I love it. I love it because we’re getting great people.The first one I met was Josh Hawley. After about 10 minutes, I said to the people, “Don’t show me anybody else. This is the guy.” He was the attorney general. Did a phenomenal job in the state. Highly respected. And — Claire McCaskill.So, the theory was you couldn’t beat her. Great campaigner. Remember the last campaign, she was going to be taken out. She was always going to be taken out, then she wins and people say, “How did that happen?” Didn’t happen with him.But she got so friendly toward me. In fact, one of the ads I still have. I’m putting it in the archives as one of the best ads I’ve ever made. (Laughter.) And she tried to convince people that we were best friends. But Josh ended up winning by five or six points.You were unbelievable. You were tough. And you are something. And one of the greatest supporters on the impeachment hoax was Josh Hawley. He was incensed actually; I watched it. He was incensed at what they were doing and what they were saying.And those were the ones — you know, I had some that said, “Oh, I wish you didn’t make the call.” And that’s okay, if they need that. It’s incorrect. It’s totally incorrect. And then you have some that used religion as a crutch. They never used it before. An article written today: “Never heard him use it before.” But today, you know, it’s one of those things. But, you know, it’s a failed presidential candidate, so things can happen when you fail so badly running for President.But, Josh Hawley, I want to thank you. You were right from the beginning. Man, did I make a good choice. (Applause.) Thank you, Josh. Tremendous future. A man who is brilliant and who actually was deceived, to an extent, comes from a great state, Utah, where my poll numbers have gone through the roof. And one of the senators’ poll numbers, and not this one, went down big. You saw that. You saw that, Mike?But Mike Lee is a brilliant guy. He’s difficult. (Laughter.) Whenever I sign bills — you know, we do sign a lot of legislation that’s — it’s big and it’s powerful, but it’s sort of everybody has to approve it. And I see 99 to 1 — (laughter) — 99 to 1. I say, “Don’t tell me who’s the one.” (Laughter.) “Is it Mike?” “Yes.” (Laughter.) And he always has a good reason for it too, by the way. But he is — he’s incredible. And right at the beginning, he knew we were right, Mike, and I appreciate it very much. You’re just fantastic. And say hello to the people of Utah and tell them, “I’m sorry about Mitt Romney. I’m sorry.” (Laughter and applause.) Okay?We can say that Mike Lee is, by far, the most popular senator from the state. But you’ve done a fantastic job, Mike, in many ways. In many ways.A young woman who I didn’t know at all, but she’s been so supportive — and I’ve had great support from other people in that state. And she’s been so supportive, and she’s been downright nasty and mean about the unfairness to the President. And Kelly Loeffler, I appreciate very much. Thank you. (Applause.) Great.She saw it very early on, and we have — I don’t know if we have other senators here, but we got a hell of a lot of congressmen. And I’ll go over them quickly, but they have — they have also been — you know, it helped when we won 197 to nothing. That’s got to be a first, Kevin. Right? Is that, like, a first?The Republicans have this image. See, I say Democrats are lousy politicians because they have lousy policy: open borders, sanctuary cities. They have horrible policy. Who the hell can win? Oh, their new policy is: Raise taxes. They want to raise taxes. You know, all my life, I wasn’t in politics, but I’d say, if you’re a politician, you want to say, “We’re going to lower taxes.” They want to raise taxes.So they have open borders, sanctuary cities. “Raise everybody’s taxes. Get rid of everybody’s healthcare.” A hundred and eighty million people in the United States. And they’re really happy. “And we’re going to give you a healthcare that’s going to cost more money than the country could make in 30 years if it really does well.” That’s one year.So I’ve always said they’re lousy politicians, but they do two things: They are vicious and mean. Vicious. These people are vicious. Adam Schiff is a vicious, horrible person. Nancy Pelosi is a horrible person. And she wanted to impeach a long time ago. When she said, “I pray for the President. I pray for the…” — she doesn’t pray. She may pray, but she prays for the opposite. (Laughter.) But I doubt she prays at all.And these are vicious people, but they do two things: They stick together, historically. I’m not talking now. They stick together like glue. That’s how they impeached, because they had whatever the number is — 220 people. So if they don’t lose anybody, they’ll be able to impeach anybody. You could be George Washington. You could have just won the war, and they say, “Let’s get him out of office.” And they stuck together, and they’re vicious as hell. And they’ll probably come back for more, but maybe not because the Republican Party’s poll numbers, Mitch, have now gone up more than any time, I think, since 2004, 2005, and you know what happened then.But in normal times — decades, you would call it; that was a little unusual time; it was for a very short period — the Republicans [sic] Party — Party’s poll numbers and Donald Trump’s poll numbers are the highest I’ve ever had them. So maybe they were. It’s no way to get your poll numbers up. It’s not worth it — because from my family’s standpoint, it’s been very unfair for my family. It’s been very unfair to the country.Think of it. A phone call. A very good phone call. I know bad phone calls. This is a phone call with many people. I think Mike Pompeo was probably on the call. Where is Mike? Mike Pompeo was on the call. Many people were on the call. I know there were many people. They even have “apprenti,” bringing up an old favorite word of mine. “The Apprentice.” They have “apprenti.” They have people on these calls. And I know there are many.When I speak to the head of a nation — and they have many people on. I mean, also on — do you think they just — in the case of Ukraine, he’s a new president, seems like a very nice person, by the way. His whole thing was corruption. He’s going to stop corruption. We even have a treaty — 2001, 1999. It’s a treaty — signed treaty — that we will work together to root out corruption in Ukraine.I probably have a legal obligation, Mr. Attorney, to report corruption. But they don’t think it’s corrupt when a son that made no money, that got thrown out of the military, that had no money at all, is working for $3 million up front, $83,000 a month. And that’s only Ukraine. Then goes to China, picks up $1.5 billion. Then goes to Romania, I hear, and many other countries.They think that’s okay? Because if it is — is Ivanka in the audience? Is Ivanka here? Boy, my kids could make a fortune. (Laughter.) They could make a fortune. It’s corrupt. But it’s not even that; it’s just general corruption.And the other thing, as mentioned in the call and something that I’ve told Mike Pence, our great Vice President — I would tell him all the time, and I told him when he went on the trip, because he was over there. He never mentioned anything about this when you had your meeting. It’s a terrible thing.But I told Mike. I said, “Mike, we’re giving them money, and, you know, you’re always torn about that because we have our country to build, we have our cities to build and our roads to fix. But we’re giving them money. Tell me, why isn’t Germany paying money? Why isn’t France? Why isn’t United Kingdom paying money? Why aren’t they paying money? Why are we paying them money?” Is that a correct statement, Mike?I say, “Find out what the hell is going on.” And I told that to all of my people, OMB. I said — I asked that question: “How much is Germany paying? Why isn’t Germany paying?” Why is the United States always the sucker? Because we’re a bunch of suckers. But that’s turning around fast. But it makes it harder when stuff like this happens, because you want to focus, and you want to focus perfectly.Think what we could have done if the same energy was put into infrastructure, prescription drug prices. Think of what we could have done. And I’m now talking both sides. Think of what we could have done if we had the same genius — because it’s genius.I will say, it’s genius on the other side — maybe even more so because they took nothing and brought me to a final vote of impeachment. That’s a very ugly word to me. It’s a very dark word. Very ugly. They took nothing. They took a phone call that was a totally appropriate call. I call it a “perfect call” because it was. And they brought me to the final stages of impeachment.But now we have that gorgeous word — I never thought a word would sound so good. It’s called “total acquittal.” (Applause.) Total acquittal.So — so I want to, if I could, real fast, just introduce a few of the people. I have to start with — I have to start with Kevin. Man, did you do a job. Lucky you’re there. Lucky you’re there because it wouldn’t have worked out. If you don’t have the right people — I’ll tell you, Kevin McCarthy has done an incredible job. (Applause.) Really. Stand up.And he loves this job, and he loves this country. I’ll tell you what: Mitch and Kevin, they love what they do. Now, Mitch wouldn’t even tell you he liked it. (Laughter.) I’d say, “Mitch, do you like it?” “I don’t know.” (Laughter.) He’s the greatest poker player, right?Kevin will say, “I love it.” Right? And I will say that you’re going to be Speaker of the House because of this impeachment hoax. (Applause.) I really believe it. I really believe it. And I’m going to work hard on it. I’m going to try and get out to those Trump — those Trump areas that we won by a lot.And, you know, in ’18, we didn’t win. We just won two seats in North Carolina — two wonderful seats in North Carolina that were not supposed to be won. But I went and I made speeches, and we had rallies, and we did a great job and we won. We took two seats. Nobody writes about that. If we lost them, it would have been the biggest story of the year.But we’re going to go, we’re going to do a job, and we’re going to win a lot of seats. We’re going to win a lot of seats. People are very angry that Nancy Pelosi and all of these guys — I mean, Nadler — I know him much of my life; he’s fought me in New York for 25 years. I always beat him. And I had to beat him another time. And I’ll probably have to beat him again. Because if they find that I happen to walk across the street, and maybe go against the light or something, “Let’s impeach him.” (Laughter.)So we’ll probably have to do it again because these people have gone stone-cold crazy. But I’ve beaten them all my life, and I’ll beat them again if I have to. (Applause.) But what they’re doing is very unfair. Very unfair.So Kevin McCarthy has been great. So, a few names, right? And there’ll be a few you forget. If you want, you can raise and I’ll say, “Great. Love to have you. Wonderful.” (Laughter.) But we’re going to do the best we can. And I have my Cabinet, but my Cabinet is different — I appoint them. Okay? I didn’t see all of them helping so much. (Laughter.) You know, they were running their various bureaucracies, right? (Laughter.) No, my Cabinet is great, and they’re all here.But today is the day to celebrate these great warriors, right? These are great warriors. They really fought hard for us. And —So I’ll start: Kelly Armstrong, North Dakota. Kelly, thank you. Great job. (Applause.) Great job.Jim Banks of Indiana. Jim, thank you. Great job. (Applause.)Andy Biggs. Where is Andy? Boy, oh, boy, Andy. He got — (applause) — there’s a guy. He’s tough. I hear we’re doing well in Arizona, huh? It’s going good, yeah? I think so. I think I saw a poll that was very good for me. I think we have to make sure Martha is going to do — I think Martha is going to do good. But we have some states that are going to be not easy, but Arizona has been great.And we’re stopping illegal aliens from coming in. We’re putting up walls. New Mexico, too, a state that’s never been in play for Republicans, is totally in play. Right? Nevada is really looking good. We’re doing well. We’re doing well. We’re going to have a great — there’s more spirit. I will say this: There’s more spirit now for the Republican Party, by far, than the Democrats.You know, Mike Pence just got back from a place — a beautiful place that Chuck Grassley knows well: Iowa. And he was talking about these fiasco — the Democrats, they can’t count some simple votes, and yet they want to take over your healthcare system. Think of that. (Laughter.) No, think of it.But we also had an election out there, and we got 98 percent of the vote. We have two people running, you know, and I guess they consider them non-people, but they are running. I mean, one was a governor. One was a congressman. They’re running. We got 98 percent of the vote.And everybody from the media was saying, “Who are those crowds over there?” You know, they expect it to be one of these competitive — where everybody is running because they want to win, they want to win. And it was Trump. Right, Mark Meadows? It was Trump. This was a Trump crowd.And a lot of — actually, a lot of my guys went there. They went to Iowa. And a lot of friends went there, and we had tremendous — they say the spirit — the spirit for the Republican Party right now is stronger, I think, than it’s ever been in the history of our country. I think it’s stronger than it’s ever been. (Applause.)And that includes Honest Abe Lincoln. You know, a lot of people forget Abe Lincoln. I wish he were here. I’d give him one hell of an introduction. Right? (Laughter.) But he was — he was a Republican. Abe Lincoln. Honest Abe.Bradley Byrne, Alabama. What a great place. (Applause.) Thank you, Bradley.A man who has been an unbelievable friend of mine and spokesman, and somebody that — that I really like. And I know, Kelly, you’re going to end up liking him a lot. Something is going to happen that’s going to be very good. I don’t know. I haven’t figured it out yet. But Doug Collins — where is he? Where is Doug? (Applause.) You have been so great. Thank you very much, Doug. Thank you very much. Thank you. Really amazing job.A young man who is — born with a great gene, because I know his father and how great a politician he was. But he’s from Florida. Sometimes controversial, but actually, he’s not controversial. He’s solid as a rock and he’s a friend of mine. Matt Gaetz. Matt? (Applause.) Thank you, Matt. Thank you. Great job.All right, this guy. So he’s the NCAA — meaning, a couple of years ago, when he was in college — wrestling champion. NCAA. That’s the big deal. That means, in all of college, you’re the champ, you’re the best. His record was ridiculous. Nobody would — nobody could beat him. And I see it. You know, every time, I see it. When I first got to know him — Jim Jordan — when I first got to know Jim, I said, “Huh, he never wears a jacket. What the hell is going on?” (Laughter.) He’s obviously very proud of his body. (Laughter and applause.)And they say where he works out — you know, where the congressmen, senators, they work out — they say, when Jim works out — even though he’s not as young as he was, but he works out —the machine starts burning. You know, it’s just a different form of a workout than us. Right, Sonny? And — there he is. Look at that guy.But one day I’m looking, and he looks tough. And I’m looking, and I’m looking at those ears. And I say, “Those ears have something going on there.” I said, “Did you ever wrestle?” “Yeah, I did.” But he doesn’t talk. But I checked. This guy was a world — this guy was a champion, top, top wrestler. And when I had the top — I had all of the teams.And, by the way, your Super Bowl champions are coming, I think next week or soon. Very soon. And every one of them want to be here. (Applause.) And the coach loves us. The coach is great. Andy Reid. And every one of them want to be here. We have — people love it.But we had all of the NCAA championship teams here. They had the golf, the basketball. They had every team here. And one of the teams was wrestling. The wrestling team. Was that Penn State? And Penn State won the title. They have a great team.And I walked up with Jim, and it’s like I didn’t exist. (Laughter.) Those wrestlers, they grabbed him. They love Jim Jordan, and we love you too because you are some warrior. (Applause.) True. True.A woman who became a star — we have a couple of women that became stars. You two. And I always liked the name of her — you know, I liked the name,“Lesko.” I liked it. That’s how I picked it. I liked the name. I saw that face. I saw that everything. They gave me cards. She had like seven opponents, right?And you have no idea how much the public appreciates how smart, how sharp you are. This I can’t tell. I can’t tell. They just said, “You know, she’s really good. She’s really talented.” And I said, “Let’s go.” We worked with her. She won her race. Tough race. It’s no longer tough. Because what she does out there is incredible. Arizona loves her.But you were so incredible, representing — I don’t say “me” — representing our country and getting it out of this impeachment hoax. What you did was incredible.So, Debbie, please stand up. Debbie Lesko. (Applause.)A man who I — I became very friendly with — I don’t know why. Do you ever have where — I’ll ask the media: If certain people call, you take their calls. Other people call — if they don’t have information, they won’t take anybody’s call. But other people call, and you don’t.This is a guy — he just — he’s just a very special guy. His wife I actually like better than him, to be honest. (Laughter.) Because he doesn’t know that I know that he didn’t actually support me right from the beginning, but she did. (Laughter.)And on my worst day — right? — on my worst day, my worst — I won’t tell you why it was my worst, but it was not one of those good days — she got on a bus, got many other buses and women all over North Carolina, and they toured North Carolina. Well, Mark was back sort of semi-supporting another candidate, which he ended up leaving very quickly. I don’t think you had a choice, because of your wife, but thank her.And Mark Meadows, he’s an extraordinary guy. I mean, the only problem is, I guess, he’s announcing — he’d only win by 40 points, but he’s announcing that he’ll be not running this time. Do you have somebody good to run? Somebody going to win your district by at least 20 points, please? Okay? But he’s a tremendously talented man, not just as a politician. As a human being, he’s incredible.And during these horrible times — I mean, the way he worked and Jim and all of you guys — the way they worked so — it was like their life was at stake. So many.Ron DeSantis is another one. He worked so hard. Then he called me. He said, “Sir, I’d like to run for governor.” I said, “Governor? I don’t want you to run. I like you staying.” “No, I want to run for governor.” And I said, “Well, if you have to.” “I’d like your support.” I said, “How can I support you? You’re at three.” He was at three. He had no money. Somebody was at 38 and they had $22 million cash, right? I said, “Look, if it’s important, I’ll do it,” because they — he’s been another great warrior. And he’s — by the way, he ran. I endorsed him. His numbers went through the roof.The man who we beat, who was expected to win easily, called me after the race. He said, “You endorsed him, and it was like a nuclear bomb went off. There was nothing I could do.” He never even spent his money. He saved it.But Ron DeSantis is another one, and now he’s the governor of Florida. And, by the way, he’s a great governor. He’s a very popular governor. His numbers are in the 70s. And he’s done a great job.But, Mark, I want to thank you very much. Fantastic job. Thank you very much. Mark Meadows. (Applause.)And Mike Johnson of Louisiana. Where’s Mike? Central casting. What a job. You can represent me anytime. (Applause.) You can represent me anytime. Thank you. What a job you’ve done. Thank you, Mike.And a man nobody has ever heard of, except the other side. He’s the other side’s worst nightmare. This guy goes down into dungeons and basements; he’ll find a document, no matter what. He’s the most legitimate human being. He’s the hardest worker. He’s unbelievable. He took tremendous abuse. I mean, abuse.The — the media and, you know, the other side, and the bad ones, the leakers, the liars, the dirty cops — they wanted to destroy him. They tried. They got close, but he wouldn’t let it happen. And, honestly, in a certain way, he was the first one. Wouldn’t you say, Jim and Mark and everybody? This was the first guy. He came out of nowhere. He’s saying, “These people are corrupt.” He’s still saying it. And he was unbelievable. Devin Nunes. He was unbelievable. Unbelievable. (Applause.) That’s so true, Devin.He’d come in and say — I didn’t even know hi;, I just heard there were like — there was this congressman who kept going into a basement — into files. (Laughter.) He knew something was wrong. You felt it, right? And now we know a lot more than we knew then, right? You never thought it was as bad as it is. And hopefully we’re going to take care of things, because we can never, ever allow this to happen again. (Applause.)Scott Perry of Pennsylvania. Scott, thank you. (Applause.) Thank you, Scott. Really great. And you’re doing very well over there, by the way. Just saw your numbers.A man who is a — I mean, central casting. If I’m going to pick Perry Mason, I’m going to do a remake of Perry Mason — other than Bill Barr, I’d pick this guy. But I have to say, I’ll pick Barr. I pick Barr first, right? (Laughter.) John Ratcliffe, right? But I have to tell you, if we’re doing a remake of Perry Mason, the man I get — there’s nobody in Hollywood like this — John Ratcliffe, right? (Applause.) Stand up, John.So — such a great lawyer. Incredible guy. Incredible talent. But just a great lawyer and we appreciate it. He gets on that screen, and everyone says, “I agree.” The other side folds up so fast. We’ll probably be using a lot of you in the next year. But you have been fantastic, John. We appreciate it. Thank you very much.A man who’s braver than me and braver than all of us in this room. He got — he got whacked. He got whacked. My Steve, right? I went to the hospital with our great First Lady that night. Right, honey? And we saw a man that was not going to make it. He was not going to make it. He was — the doctor — and I told him his wife — I said, “She loves you.” “Why do you say that?” Because she was devastated.A lot of wives wouldn’t give a damn. (Laughter.) A lot of — a lot of wives — a lot of wives would have said, “Oh, yeah.” I said, “How’s he doing?” “Oh…” She couldn’t even talk. She was inconsolable. Most wives would say, “Not good. Listen, I’m going home now.” (Laughter.) But the doctor came in — the wife is like — she was a total mess. She was really devastated. And he really — it looked like he had a 20, 25 percent chance. I think you set a record for blood loss.And, Steve Scalise, I — actually, honestly, I think you’re better looking now. You’re more handsome now. (Laughter.) You — you weren’t that good looking. You look good now. (Laughter.) He looks better now. Can you believe it? I don’t know what the hell that is. (Applause.) It’s true. Better now. (Applause.) What a guy.And he was practicing — he was practicing for the baseball game against, I guess, the Democrats, right? And this whack-job started shooting. Hurt Roger — I don’t know if Roger is here. But hurt a number of people — hit them. But really hit Steve. He — Steve was at second base. He was the second baseman. And he went down and it was terrible. I mean, I saw the whole thing and it was terrible.Fortunately, you had two brave policemen with you. Because of your high position in Congress, you had two policemen and they were amazing — the man and a woman. And they came and they didn’t have rifles. They were against a, supposedly, pretty good sharpshooter with rifles — good equipment. And all they had was a gun. And they started coming in from the outfield, shooting. And they’re so far away that a handgun is not preferred. This guy has the rifle and he’s hitting people. And he was going to move up and there was no out. I mean, if he would have been able to move up, there was no way to get out. The entrance was a single entranceway on the other side, where he was.So everyone went into the dugout — ran into the dugout, but Steve was really hit badly in the stomach, and — with a bullet that rips you apart. It was supposed to do that. It rips — it rips you apart.And these two people came charging forward. Boom. Boom. Boom. And one of them — you know who — one of them — him? — got the shooter. Hit him. And then got him. Killed him from the long distance. It was amazing. If you didn’t have those two people — you can imagine, right? You could imagine what would happen.So Melania and I went to the hospital that night. And he was in such bad shape, and he’s been working ever since, so hard. But six months ago, they had a baseball game at the Nationals Park. And I’m watching and it’s — it’s on television. And it’s just, you know, a game. People — you want to win it, right? And Steve’s at second base. The poor guy can’t even walk.Do you remember Bobby Richardson for the New York Yankees? He was known for range, Louie. Range. He had the greatest range. If a ball is hit to shortstop — Bobby Richardson is the second player, the second baseman — Bobby Richardson would field the ball. If it’s hit to first base, he’ll throw it to the first baseman. He had unbelievable range. This was not Steve Scalise. (Laughter.) Steve had no range. (Laughter.) One foot and he has to fall down, right? Because, you know, he was trying to get better. I don’t know who the hell put you on the field. (Laughter.)And this is a true story. So the game starts and the first pitch — Steve is standing at second base and the guy is really in bad shape. And I said, “This is terrible.” A shot — groundball shot is hit to second and Steve. I say — I didn’t have time to think too much, but I said, “This is not good. That ball is going toward him.”And this guy stopped that ball, caught the call. He’s now laying down. He throws the ball to first base. He gets him out. I said, “It’s the most incredible thing.” I’ve never seen — athletically — (applause) — I’ve never seen anything like it, right?And he gets him out and they then took him out of the game, which was a very wise thing because you could never do that again in a million years. (Laughter.) But you weren’t going to let that ball go through. I don’t care if it was hit by the greatest of all time, right? That ball was not going through you, because you are a warrior. Steve is — he is fantastic. You are fantastic. You and Liz and Kevin.What a great — what a group. I mean, what a group. I got lucky. I got lucky because you need the right people. If I had the wrong people there, he — maybe a different story. Maybe we’d be celebrating something else. But I really want to thank you, Steve Scalise.And, Elise, you — I just read this story; she’s the most incredible — what’s going on with you, Elise. So I even said — you know, I was up campaigning for her, helping her. But I thought, “She looks good. She looks like good talent.” But did I not realize, when she opens that mouth, you were killing them, Elise. (Laughter.) You were killing them. (Applause.)Elise — and there’s a big story in the New York Post — I love the New York Post because they treat me well. There aren’t too many of you that do. But today, you’re treating me well. I even had a great headline — New York Times, Washington Post. I had all of these great headlines. Maybe we should just end it right there. (Laughter.)But you had the greatest story, yesterday in the Post, that people from all over the country are contributing to her campaign. They were so enthralled with the way you handled yourself, what you said, the way you said it. And I’ll always be your friend. I think it was — it’s really an amazing story. What a great future you have. What a great future. Thank you. (Applause.) The First Lady agrees, by the way. The First Lady agrees.And Michael Turner, you can represent me anytime. Where’s Michael? Where is he? (Applause.) Or you can represent me. How good were you? There’s another — there’s another Perry Mason type, I think. Right? What do you think, John? But, Michael, you were fantastic and we appreciate it.Brad Wenstrup. Where’s Brad? Brad. (Applause.) Great, great job. This is a big day for lawyers. You notice only the lawyers stayed? All the lawyers stayed behind.Lee Zeldin. How good are you? How good are you? (Applause.) Man.And, Louie, your name is not down. They didn’t give me your name. Do you know — if I didn’t announce Louie — (laughter) — whoever the hell made this list, I got to get rid of because I — if I wouldn’t have announced Louie, it might have been the end of the presidency. (Laughter.) Louie, you have been so great. So tough and so smart. I got it just — (laughs) — I got it. But Louie has been amazing. He’s a tough guy. He’s a smart guy. He’s streetwise like crazy. We love Texas, and we’re with you all the way, Louie. We’re with you all the way. Thank you very much. (Applause.)So that’s the story. We have a great group of warriors, and there are others left, and, I guess, probably, I’m sure I didn’t mention a few, and I apologize if that’s the case. How’s CPAC doing? Good? Huh? My man, stand up please, will you? He’s the one who said, “You should run.” (Applause.) Right?Matt said — it’s like five years ago, six years ago. And I made a speech, and then they do some kind of a straw poll: “Who made the best speech?” And he said, “I made the best speech.” With all this professional — I hate to say this: With all these professional politicians, they voted, by far, the best speech was Trump. He calls me, he says, “You should run for politics.” I say, “What do I know about politics?”But you know what? We learned quickly, and our country has never done better than it’s doing right now. (Applause.) So it’s been good. (Applause.) But thank you, Matt. Great. Say hello.So that’s the story. We’ve been treated very unfairly. Fortunately, we have great men and women that came to our defense. If we didn’t, this would have been a horrific incident for our country. When you have Lisa and Peter, the lovers, the FBI lovers: “I want to believe the path you threw out for” Deputy Director Andrew McCabe. That’s the office. “There’s no way he gets elected” — meaning me. “There’s no way he gets elected.”This is Peter, to Lisa. He’s probably trying to impress her, for obvious reasons. (Laughter.) “There’s no way he gets elected. But I’m afraid we can’t take the risk.” Now, think of this. In other words, if I get elected, they can’t — “they”; two low-lifes — they can’t take the risk. They can’t take the risk. Think of it.And that’s where it came up, the greatest word of all: “insurance policy.” So he says, “But I’m afraid we can’t take the risk. She may lose.” It’s like an insurance policy. In the unlikely event you die before you’re 40 — in other words, if I won, they were going to do exactly what they did to us. They were going to try and overthrow the government of the United States — a duly elected president.And if I didn’t fire James Comey, we would have never found this stuff. Because when I fired that sleazebag, all hell broke out. They were ratting on each other. They were running for the hills. Let’s see what happens. Let’s see what happens. It’s in the hands of some very talented people. We’re going to have to see what happens.But I can tell you, in my opinion, these are the crookedest, most dishonest, dirtiest people I’ve ever seen. They said — this is Strzok: “God, Hillary should win 100 million to one.” This is about me. This is an agent from the FBI. Look how they let her off. Thirty-three thousand emails deleted. Nothing happens to her. Nothing happens. It’s unbelievable.But think of that — “God, Hillary should win” — when these guys are investigating Hillary. Then they go to work for Mueller — the two of them — and when Muller found out that everybody knew that they were 100 percent this way, he let them go. But they deleted all of their emails and text messages.So when we got the phone, they were all deleted. Could you imagine the treasure trove? They illegally deleted. So they left. They left Bob Mueller. He had the look, but he didn’t have a lot of other things. Always had the look. Mr. G-Man.And I love the FBI and the FBI loves me — 99 percent. It was the top scum. And the FBI people don’t like the top scum.So think of that: 100 million to one. And he’s investigating me. And then, “God, Trump is a loathsome human being, isn’t he?” These are the people looking at me. I’m really not a bad person. And Page said, “Yes, he’s awful.” How would you like to have that? This is just — this is the good stuff. There’s stuff a hundred times worse than that. These are all dirty people.And now, I just heard that they’re suing the United States of America because they were interfered with. We’re not going to let it happen. Just not going to let it happen. We cannot let this happen to our country. We can’t. (Applause.)So, I’m going to leave now. And I don’t know if any of you have anything to say. You could say it. But this is sort of a day of celebration, because we went through hell.And I’m sure that Pelosi and Cryin’ Chuck — I’ve known this guy all the — the only time I ever saw him cry was when it was appropriate. Known him for a long time. Cryin’ Chuck. But I’m sure they’ll try and cook up other things. They’ll go through the state of New York. They’ll go through other places. They’ll do whatever they can. Because instead of wanting to heal our country and fix our country, all they want to do — in my opinion, it’s almost like they want to destroy our country. We can’t let it happen.Jim Jordan, did you want to say something? Go ahead. Huh? Mark?REPRESENTATIVE MEADOWS: No, I just — I wanted to just say that this reflection today, it is a small reflection of the kind of support you have all across the country. We’ve got your back. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Well, thank you. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause.)This was a highly partisan situation. Pelosi said — I copied it down exactly. Before the impeachment — she wanted to impeach from day one, by the way. Don’t let it fool you. You know, she said, “No, the impeachment is a very serious thing.” I said, “She wants to impeach. Watch.”Impeachment is so divisive to the country that unless there’s something so compelling and so overwhelming and bipartisan — bipartisan. It was 197 to nothing. And other than one failed presidential candidate — and I call that “half a vote” because he actually voted for us on the other one. But we had one failed presidential candidate. That’s the only half a vote we lost. So, we had almost 53 to nothing. We had 197 to nothing. And the only one that voted against was a guy that can’t stand the fact that he ran one of the worst campaigns in the history of the presidency.But she said, “There’s something so compelling — it has to be so compelling and so overwhelming and bipartisan. I don’t think we should go down that path, because it divides the country” — she was right about that —“and it’s just not worth it.” That was Nancy Pelosi a year ago. Right?And I think it’s a shame. I think it’s a shame. But as I said, if we can put this genius to work on roads and highways and bridges and all of the things we can do — prescription drugs. You know, we had — Secretary Azar is here and I want to thank him for this, but we had — first time in 51 years, where drug prices actually came down last year. First time in 51 years. But what we can do, working with both parties in Congress, is — would be unbelievable. It would be unbelievable — all we can do.And I know Chuck Grassley is working very hard on it and Mitch is working very hard on it. But what we can do is — is incredible. What we can do, just generally. We’ve done so much without it. We’ve rebuilt our military. We’ve cut regulations at a level that nobody thought possible. We’ll always protect our Second Amendment; we all know that.But I just want to tell you that it’s an honor to be with you all. I want to apologize to my family for having them have to go through a phony, rotten deal by some very evil and sick people. And Ivanka is here, and my — my sons and my whole family, and that includes Barron. (Applause.) That includes Barron, who is up there as a young boy.Stand up, honey. (Applause.) Ivanka, thank you, honey. Come. Come. (Applause.) (The President hugs Ivanka Trump.)Come here, baby. (Applause.) (The President hugs the First Lady.)So I just want to thank my family for sticking through it. This was not part of the deal. I was going to run for President, and if I won, I was going do a great job. I didn’t know that I was going to run, and then when I got in, I was going to have to run again and again and again. Every week, I had to run again. That wasn’t the deal, but they stuck with me.And I’m so glad I did it because we are making progress and doing things for our great people that everybody said couldn’t be done. Our country is thriving. Our country is just respected again. And it’s an honor to be with the people in this room.Thank you very much, everybody. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause.) Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you very much.Madam Speaker, Mr. Vice President, members of Congress, the First Lady of the United States—(applause)—and my fellow citizens:Three years ago, we launched the great American comeback. Tonight, I stand before you to share the incredible results. Jobs are booming, incomes are soaring, poverty is plummeting, crime is falling, confidence is surging, and our country is thriving and highly respected again. (Applause.) America’s enemies are on the run, America’s fortunes are on the rise, and America’s future is blazing bright.The years of economic decay are over. (Applause.) The days of our country being used, taken advantage of, and even scorned by other nations are long behind us. (Applause.) Gone too are the broken promises, jobless recoveries, tired platitudes, and constant excuses for the depletion of American wealth, power, and prestige.In just three short years, we have shattered the mentality of American decline, and we have rejected the downsizing of America’s destiny. We have totally rejected the downsizing. We are moving forward at a pace that was unimaginable just a short time ago, and we are never, ever going back. (Applause.)I am thrilled to report to you tonight that our economy is the best it has ever been. Our military is completely rebuilt, with its power being unmatched anywhere in the world—and it’s not even close. Our borders are secure. Our families are flourishing. Our values are renewed. Our pride is restored. And for all of these reasons, I say to the people of our great country and to the members of Congress: The state of our Union is stronger than ever before. (Applause.)The vision I will lay out this evening demonstrates how we are building the world’s most prosperous and inclusive society—one where every citizen can join in America’s unparalleled success and where every community can take part in America’s extraordinary rise.From the instant I took office, I moved rapidly to revive the U.S. economy—slashing a record number of job-killing regulations, enacting historic and record-setting tax cuts, and fighting for fair and reciprocal trade agreements. (Applause.) Our agenda is relentlessly pro-worker, pro-family, pro-growth, and, most of all, pro-American. (Applause.) Thank you. We are advancing with unbridled optimism and lifting our citizens of every race, color, religion, and creed very, very high.Since my election, we have created 7 million new jobs—5 million more than government experts projected during the previous administration. (Applause.)The unemployment rate is the lowest in over half a century. (Applause.) And very incredibly, the average unemployment rate under my administration is lower than any administration in the history of our country. (Applause.) True. If we hadn’t reversed the failed economic policies of the previous administration, the world would not now be witnessing this great economic success. (Applause.)The unemployment rate for African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Asian Americans has reached the lowest levels in history. (Applause.) African American youth unemployment has reached an all-time low. (Applause.) African American poverty has declined to the lowest rate ever recorded. (Applause.)The unemployment rate for women reached the lowest level in almost 70 years. And, last year, women filled 72 percent of all new jobs added. (Applause.)The veterans unemployment rate dropped to a record low. (Applause.) The unemployment rate for disabled Americans has reached an all-time low. (Applause.)Workers without a high school diploma have achieved the lowest unemployment rate recorded in U.S. history. (Applause.) A record number of young Americans are now employed. (Applause.)Under the last administration, more than 10 million people were added to the food stamp rolls. Under my administration, 7 million Americans have come off food stamps, and 10 million people have been lifted off of welfare. (Applause.)In eight years under the last administration, over 300,000 working-age people dropped out of the workforce. In just three years of my administration, 3.5 million people—working-age people—have joined the workforce. (Applause.)Since my election, the net worth of the bottom half of wage earners has increased by 47 percent—three times faster than the increase for the top 1 percent. (Applause.) After decades of flat and falling incomes, wages are rising fast—and, wonderfully, they are rising fastest for low-income workers, who have seen a 16 percent pay increase since my election. (Applause.) This is a blue-collar boom. (Applause.)Real median household income is now at the highest level ever recorded. (Applause.)Since my election, U.S. stock markets have soared 70 percent, adding more than $12 trillion to our nation’s wealth, transcending anything anyone believed was possible. This is a record. It is something that every country in the world is looking up to. They admire. (Applause.) Consumer confidence has just reached amazing new highs.All of those millions of people with 401(k)s and pensions are doing far better than they have ever done before with increases of 60, 70, 80, 90, and 100 percent, and even more.Jobs and investments are pouring into 9,000 previously neglected neighborhoods thanks to Opportunity Zones, a plan spearheaded by Senator Tim Scott as part of our great Republican tax cuts. (Applause.) In other words, wealthy people and companies are pouring money into poor neighborhoods or areas that haven’t seen investment in many decades, creating jobs, energy, and excitement. (Applause.) This is the first time that these deserving communities have seen anything like this. It’s all working.Opportunity Zones are helping Americans like Army veteran Tony Rankins from Cincinnati, Ohio. After struggling with drug addiction, Tony lost his job, his house, and his family. He was homeless. But then Tony found a construction company that invests in Opportunity Zones. He is now a top tradesman, drug-free, reunited with his family, and he is here tonight. Tony, keep up the great work. Tony. (Applause.) Thank you, Tony.Our roaring economy has, for the first time ever, given many former prisoners the ability to get a great job and a fresh start. This second chance at life is made possible because we passed landmark criminal justice reform into law. Everybody said that criminal justice reform couldn’t be done, but I got it done, and the people in this room got it done. (Applause.)Thanks to our bold regulatory reduction campaign, the United States has become the number one producer of oil and natural gas anywhere in the world, by far. (Applause.) With the tremendous progress we have made over the past three years, America is now energy independent, and energy jobs, like so many other elements of our country, are at a record high. (Applause.) We are doing numbers that no one would have thought possible just three years ago.Likewise, we are restoring our nation’s manufacturing might, even though predictions were, as you all know, that this could never, ever be done. After losing 60,000 factories under the previous two administrations, America has now gained 12,000 new factories under my administration, with thousands upon thousands of plants and factories being planned or being built. (Applause.) Companies are not leaving; they are coming back to the USA. (Applause.) The fact is that everybody wants to be where the action is, and the United States of America is indeed the place where the action is. (Applause.)One of the biggest promises I made to the American people was to replace the disastrous NAFTA trade deal. (Applause.) In fact, unfair trade is perhaps the single biggest reason that I decided to run for President. Following NAFTA’s adoption, our nation lost one in four manufacturing jobs. Many politicians came and went, pledging to change or replace NAFTA, only to do so, and then absolutely nothing happened. But unlike so many who came before me, I keep my promises. We did our job. (Applause.)Six days ago, I replaced NAFTA and signed the brand-new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement into law. The USMCA will create nearly 100,000 new high-paying American auto jobs, and massively boost exports for our farmers, ranchers, and factory workers. (Applause.) It will also bring trade with Mexico and Canada to a much higher level, but also to be a much greater degree of fairness and reciprocity. We will have that: fairness and reciprocity. And I say that, finally, because it’s been many, many years that we were treated fairly on trade. (Applause.)This is the first major trade deal in many years to earn the strong backing of America’s labor unions. (Applause.)I also promised our citizens that I would impose tariffs to confront China’s massive theft of America’s jobs. Our strategy has worked. Days ago, we signed the groundbreaking new agreement with China that will defend our workers, protect our intellectual property, bring billions and billions of dollars into our treasury, and open vast new markets for products made and grown right here in the USA. (Applause.)For decades, China has taken advantage of the United States. Now we have changed that, but, at the same time, we have perhaps the best relationship we’ve ever had with China, including with President Xi. They respect what we’ve done because, quite frankly, they could never really believe that they were able to get away with what they were doing year after year, decade after decade, without someone in our country stepping up and saying, “That’s enough.” (Applause.) Now we want to rebuild our country, and that’s exactly what we’re doing. We are rebuilding our country.As we restore American leadership throughout the world, we are once again standing up for freedom in our hemisphere. (Applause.) That’s why my administration reversed the failing policies of the previous administration on Cuba. (Applause.)We are supporting the hopes of Cubans, Nicaraguans, and Venezuelans to restore democracy. The United States is leading a 59-nation diplomatic coalition against the socialist dictator of Venezuela, Nicolás Maduro. (Applause.) Maduro is an illegitimate ruler, a tyrant who brutalizes his people. But Maduro’s grip on tyranny will be smashed and broken.Here this evening is a very brave man who carries with him the hopes, dreams, and aspirations of all Venezuelans. Joining us in the Gallery is the true and legitimate President of Venezuela, Juan Guaidó. (Applause.) Mr. President, please take this message back to your homeland. (Applause.) Thank you, Mr. President. Great honor. Thank you very much.Please take this message back that all Americans are united with the Venezuelan people in their righteous struggle for freedom. Thank you very much, Mr. President. (Applause.) Thank you very much.Socialism destroys nations. But always remember: Freedom unifies the soul. (Applause.)To safeguard American liberty, we have invested a record-breaking $2.2 trillion in the United States military. (Applause.) We have purchased the finest planes, missiles, rockets, ships, and every other form of military equipment, and it’s all made right here in the USA. (Applause.)We are also getting our allies, finally, to help pay their fair share. (Applause.) I have raised contributions from the other NATO members by more than $400 billion, and the number of Allies meeting their minimum obligations has more than doubled.And just weeks ago, for the first time since President Truman established the Air Force more than 70 years earlier, we created a brand-new branch of the United States Armed Forces. It’s called the Space Force. (Applause.) Very important.In the Gallery tonight, we have a young gentleman. And what he wants so badly—13 years old—Iain Lanphier. He’s an eighth grader from Arizona. Iain, please stand up.Iain has always dreamed of going to space. He was the first in his class and among the youngest at an aviation academy. He aspires to go to the Air Force Academy, and then he has his eye on the Space Force. As Iain says, “Most people look up at space. I want to look down on the world.” (Laughter and applause.)But sitting behind Iain tonight is his greatest hero of them all. Charles McGee was born in Cleveland, Ohio, one century ago. Charles is one of the last surviving Tuskegee Airmen—the first black fighter pilots—and he also happens to be Iain’s great-grandfather. (Applause.) Incredible story.After more than 130 combat missions in World War Two, he came back home to a country still struggling for civil rights and went on to serve America in Korea and Vietnam. On December 7th, Charles celebrated his 100th birthday. (Applause.) A few weeks ago, I signed a bill promoting Charles McGee to Brigadier General. And earlier today, I pinned the stars on his shoulders in the Oval Office. General McGee, our nation salutes you. Thank you, sir. (Applause.)From the pilgrims to the Founders, from the soldiers at Valley Forge to the marchers at Selma, and from President Lincoln to the Reverend Martin Luther King, Americans have always rejected limits on our children’s future.Members of Congress, we must never forget that the only victories that matter in Washington are victories that deliver for the American people. (Applause.) The people are the heart of our country, their dreams are the soul of our country, and their love is what powers and sustains our country. We must always remember that our job is to put America first. (Applause.)The next step forward in building an inclusive society is making sure that every young American gets a great education and the opportunity to achieve the American Dream. Yet, for too long, countless American children have been trapped in failing government schools. To rescue these students, 18 states have created school choice in the form of Opportunity Scholarships. The programs are so popular that tens of thousands of students remain on a waiting list.One of those students is Janiyah Davis, a fourth grader from Philadelphia. Janiyah. (Applause.) Janiyah’s mom, Stephanie, is a single parent. She would do anything to give her daughter a better future. But last year, that future was put further out of reach when Pennsylvania’s governor vetoed legislation to expand school choice to 50,000 children.Janiyah and Stephanie are in the Gallery. Stephanie, thank you so much for being here with your beautiful daughter. Thank you very much. (Applause.)But, Janiyah, I have some good news for you, because I am pleased to inform you that your long wait is over. I can proudly announce tonight that an Opportunity Scholarship has become available, it’s going to you, and you will soon be heading to the school of your choice. (Applause.)Now I call on Congress to give one million American children the same opportunity Janiyah has just received. Pass the Education Freedom Scholarships and Opportunities Act—because no parent should be forced to send their child to a failing government school. (Applause.)Every young person should have a safe and secure environment in which to learn and to grow. For this reason, our magnificent First Lady has launched the BE BEST initiative to advance a safe, healthy, supportive, and drug-free life for the next generation—online, in school, and in our communities. Thank you, Melania, for your extraordinary love and profound care for America’s children. Thank you very much. (Applause.)My administration is determined to give our citizens the opportunities they need regardless of age or background. Through our Pledge to American Workers, over 400 companies will also provide new jobs and education opportunities to almost 15 million Americans.My budget also contains an exciting vision for our nation’s high schools. Tonight, I ask Congress to support our students and back my plan to offer vocational and technical education in every single high school in America. (Applause.)To expand equal opportunity, I am also proud that we achieved record and permanent funding for our nation’s historically black colleges and universities. (Applause.)A good life for American families also requires the most affordable, innovative, and high-quality healthcare system on Earth. Before I took office, health insurance premiums had more than doubled in just five years. I moved quickly to provide affordable alternatives. Our new plans are up to 60 percent less expensive—and better. (Applause.)I’ve also made an ironclad pledge to American families: We will always protect patients with pre-existing conditions. (Applause). And we will always protect your Medicare and we will always protect your Social Security. Always. (Applause.)The American patient should never be blindsided by medical bills. That is why I signed an executive order requiring price transparency. (Applause.) Many experts believe that transparency, which will go into full effect at the beginning of next year, will be even bigger than healthcare reform. (Applause.) It will save families massive amounts of money for substantially better care.But as we work to improve Americans’ healthcare, there are those who want to take away your healthcare, take away your doctor, and abolish private insurance entirely.AUDIENCE: BoooTHE PRESIDENT: One hundred thirty-two lawmakers in this room have endorsed legislation to impose a socialist takeover of our healthcare system, wiping out the private health insurance plans of 180 million very happy Americans. To those watching at home tonight, I want you to know: We will never let socialism destroy American healthcare. (Applause.)Over 130 legislators in this chamber have endorsed legislation that would bankrupt our nation by providing free taxpayer-funded healthcare to millions of illegal aliens, forcing taxpayers to subsidize free care for anyone in the world who unlawfully crosses our borders. These proposals would raid the Medicare benefits of our seniors and that our seniors depend on, while acting as a powerful lure for illegal immigration. That is what is happening in California and other states. Their systems are totally out of control, costing taxpayers vast and unaffordable amounts of money.If forcing American taxpayers to provide unlimited free healthcare to illegal aliens sounds fair to you, then stand with the radical left. But if you believe that we should defend American patients and American seniors, then stand with me and pass legislation to prohibit free government healthcare for illegal aliens. (Applause.)This will be a tremendous boon to our already very strongly guarded southern border where, as we speak, a long, tall, and very powerful wall is being built. (Applause.) We have now completed over 100 miles and have over 500 miles fully completed in a very short period of time. Early next year, we will have substantially more than 500 miles completed.My administration is also taking on the big pharmaceutical companies. We have approved a record number of affordable generic drugs, and medicines are being approved by the FDA at a faster clip than ever before. (Applause.) And I was pleased to announce last year that, for the first time in 51 years, the cost of prescription drugs actually went down. (Applause.)And working together, Congress can reduce drug prices substantially from current levels. I’ve been speaking to Senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa and others in Congress in order to get something on drug pricing done, and done quickly and properly. I’m calling for bipartisan legislation that achieves the goal of dramatically lowering prescription drug prices. Get a bill on my desk, and I will sign it into law immediately. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: H.R.3! H.R.3! H.R.3!With unyielding commitment, we are curbing the opioid epidemic. Drug overdose deaths declined for the first time in nearly 30 years. (Applause.) Among the states hardest hit, Ohio is down 22 percent, Pennsylvania is down 18 percent, Wisconsin is down 10 percent—and we will not quit until we have beaten the opioid epidemic once and for all. (Applause.)Protecting Americans’ health also means fighting infectious diseases. We are coordinating with the Chinese government and working closely together on the coronavirus outbreak in China. My administration will take all necessary steps to safeguard our citizens from this threat.We have launched ambitious new initiatives to substantially improve care for Americans with kidney disease, Alzheimer’s, and those struggling with mental health. And because Congress was so good as to fund my request, new cures for childhood cancer, and we will eradicate the AIDS epidemic in America by the end of this decade. (Applause.)Almost every American family knows the pain when a loved one is diagnosed with a serious illness. Here tonight is a special man, beloved by millions of Americans who just received a Stage 4 advanced cancer diagnosis. This is not good news, but what is good news is that he is the greatest fighter and winner that you will ever meet. Rush Limbaugh, thank you for your decades of tireless devotion to our country. (Applause.)And, Rush, in recognition of all that you have done for our nation, the millions of people a day that you speak to and that you inspire, and all of the incredible work that you have done for charity, I am proud to announce tonight that you will be receiving our country’s highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of Freedom. (Applause.)I will now ask the First Lady of the United States to present you with the honor. Please. (Applause.)(The Medal of Freedom is presented.) (Applause.)Rush and Kathryn, congratulations. Thank you, Kathryn.As we pray for all who are sick, we know that America is constantly achieving new medical breakthroughs. In 2017, doctors at St. Luke’s Hospital in Kansas City delivered one of the earliest premature babies ever to survive. Born at just 21 weeks and 6 days, and weighing less than a pound, Ellie Schneider was a born fighter. Through the skill of her doctors and the prayers of her parents, little Ellie kept on winning the battle of life. Today, Ellie is a strong, healthy two-year-old girl sitting with her amazing mother Robin in the Gallery. Ellie and Robin, we are glad to have you with us tonight. (Applause.)Ellie reminds us that every child is a miracle of life. And thanks to modern medical wonders, 50 percent of very premature babies delivered at the hospital where Ellie was born now survive. It’s an incredible thing. Thank you very much. (Applause.)Our goal should be to ensure that every baby has the best chance to thrive and grow just like Ellie. That is why I’m asking Congress to provide an additional $50 million to fund neonatal research for America’s youngest patients. (Applause.)That is why I’m also calling upon members of Congress here tonight to pass legislation finally banning the late-term abortion of babies. (Applause.) Whether we are Republican, Democrat, or independent, surely we must all agree that every human life is a sacred gift from God.As we support America’s moms and dads, I was recently proud to sign the law providing new parents in the federal workforce paid family leave, serving as a model for the rest of the country. (Applause.)Now I call on the Congress to pass the bipartisan Advancing Support for Working Families Act, extending family leave to mothers and fathers all across our nation. (Applause.)Forty million American families have an average $2,200 extra thanks to our child tax credit. (Applause.) I’ve also overseen historic funding increases for high-quality child care, enabling 17 states to help more children, many of which have reduced or eliminated their waitlists altogether. (Applause.) And I sent Congress a plan with a vision to further expand access to high-quality child care, and urge you to act immediately. (Applause.)To protect the environment, days ago I announced that the United States will join the One Trillion Trees Initiative, an ambitious effort to bring together government and private sector to plant new trees in America and all around the world. (Applause.)We must also rebuild America’s infrastructure. (Applause.) I ask you to pass Senator John Barrasso’s highway bill to invest in new roads, bridges, and tunnels all across our land.I’m also committed to ensuring that every citizen can have access to high-speed Internet, including and especially in rural America. (Applause.)A better tomorrow for all Americans also requires us to keep America safe. That means supporting the men and women of law enforcement at every level, including our nation’s heroic ICE officers. (Applause.)Last year, our brave ICE officers arrested more than 120,000 criminal aliens charged with nearly 10,000 burglaries, 5,000 sexual assaults, 45,000 violent assaults, and 2,000 murders.Tragically, there are many cities in America where radical politicians have chosen to provide sanctuary for these criminal illegal aliens.AUDIENCE: BoooTHE PRESIDENT: In sanctuary cities, local officials order police to release dangerous criminal aliens to prey upon the public, instead of handing them over to ICE to be safely removed.Just 29 days ago, a criminal alien freed by the sanctuary city of New York was charged with the brutal rape and murder of a 92-year-old woman. The killer had been previously arrested for assault, but under New York’s sanctuary policies, he was set free. If the city had honored ICE’s detainer request, his victim would still be alive today.The state of California passed an outrageous law declaring their whole state to be a sanctuary for criminal illegal immigrants—a very terrible sanctuary—with catastrophic results.Here is just one tragic example. In December 2018, California police detained an illegal alien with five prior arrests, including convictions for robbery and assault. But as required by California’s Sanctuary Law, local authorities released him.Days later, the criminal alien went on a gruesome spree of deadly violence. He viciously shot one man going about his daily work. He approached a woman sitting in her car and shot her in the arm and in the chest. He walked into a convenience store and wildly fired his weapon. He hijacked a truck and smashed into vehicles, critically injuring innocent victims. One of the victims is—a terrible, terrible situation; died—51-year-old American named Rocky Jones.Rocky was at a gas station when this vile criminal fired eight bullets at him from close range, murdering him in cold blood. Rocky left behind a devoted family, including his brothers, who loved him more than anything else in the world. One of his grieving brothers is here with us tonight. Jody, would you please stand? Jody, thank you. (Applause.) Jody our hearts weep for your loss, and we will not rest until you have justice.Senator Thom Tillis has introduced legislation to allow Americans like Jody to sue sanctuary cities and states when a loved one is hurt or killed as a result of these deadly practices. (Applause.)I ask Congress to pass the Justice for Victims of Sanctuary Cities Act immediately. The United States of America should be a sanctuary for law-abiding Americans, not criminal aliens. (Applause.)In the last three years, ICE has arrested over 5,000 wicked human traffickers. And I have signed nine pieces of legislation to stamp out the menace of human trafficking, domestically and all around the globe. My administration has undertaken an unprecedented effort to secure the southern border of the United States. (Applause.)Before I came into office, if you showed up illegally on our southern border and were arrested, you were simply released and allowed into our country, never to be seen again. My administration has ended catch and release. (Applause.) If you come illegally, you will now be promptly removed from our country. (Applause.)Very importantly, we entered into historic cooperation agreements with the governments of Mexico, Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala. As a result of our unprecedented efforts, illegal crossings are down 75 percent since May, dropping eight straight months in a row. (Applause.) And as the wall rapidly goes up, drug seizures rise, and the border crossings are down, and going down very rapidly.Last year, I traveled to the border in Texas and met Chief Patrol Agent Raul Ortiz. Over the last 24 months, Agent Ortiz and his team have seized more than 200,000 pounds of poisonous narcotics, arrested more than 3,000 human smugglers, and rescued more than 2,000 migrants. Days ago, Agent Ortiz was promoted to Deputy Chief of Border Patrol, and he joins us tonight. Chief Ortiz, please stand. (Applause.) A grateful nation thanks you and all of the heroes of Border Patrol and ICE. Thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause.)To build on these historic gains, we are working on legislation to replace our outdated and randomized immigration system with one based on merit, welcoming those who follow the rules, contribute to our economy, support themselves financially, and uphold our values. (Applause.)With every action, my administration is restoring the rule of law and reasserting the culture of American freedom. (Applause.) Working with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell—thank you, Mitch—and his colleagues in the Senate, we have confirmed a record number of 187 new federal judges to uphold our Constitution as written. This includes two brilliant new Supreme Court justices, Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. Thank you. (Applause.) And we have many in the pipeline. (Laughter and applause.)My administration is also defending religious liberty, and that includes the constitutional right to pray in public schools. (Applause.) In America, we don’t punish prayer. We don’t tear down crosses. We don’t ban symbols of faith. We don’t muzzle preachers and pastors. In America, we celebrate faith, we cherish religion, we lift our voices in prayer, and we raise our sights to the Glory of God.Just as we believe in the First Amendment, we also believe in another constitutional right that is under siege all across our country. So long as I am President, I will always protect your Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms. (Applause.)In reaffirming our heritage as a free nation, we must remember that America has always been a frontier nation. Now we must embrace the next frontier, America’s manifest destiny in the stars. I am asking Congress to fully fund the Artemis program to ensure that the next man and the first woman on the Moon will be American astronauts using this as a launching pad to ensure that America is the first nation to plant its flag on Mars. (Applause.)My administration is also strongly defending our national security and combating radical Islamic terrorism. (Applause.)Last week, I announced a groundbreaking plan for peace between Israel and the Palestinians. Recognizing that all past attempts have failed, we must be determined and creative in order to stabilize the region and give millions of young people the chance to realize a better future.Three years ago, the barbarians of ISIS held over 20,000 square miles of territory in Iraq and Syria. Today, the ISIS territorial caliphate has been 100 percent destroyed, and the founder and leader of ISIS—the bloodthirsty killer known as al-Baghdadi—is dead. (Applause.)We are joined this evening by Carl and Marsha Mueller. After graduating from college, their beautiful daughter Kayla became a humanitarian aid worker. She once wrote, “Some people find God in church. Some people find God in nature. Some people find God in love. I find God in suffering. I’ve known for some time what my life’s work is, using my hands as tools to relieve suffering.” In 2013, while caring for suffering civilians in Syria, Kayla was kidnapped, tortured, and enslaved by ISIS, and kept as a prisoner of al-Baghdadi himself. After more than 500 horrifying days of captivity, al-Baghdadi murdered young, beautiful Kayla. She was just 26 years old.On the night that U.S. Special Forces Operations ended al-Baghdadi’s miserable life, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark Milley, received a call in the Situation Room. He was told that the brave men of the elite Special Forces team that so perfectly carried out the operation had given their mission a name: “Task Force 8-14.” It was a reference to a special day:August 14th—Kayla’s birthday. Carl and Marsha, America’s warriors never forgot Kayla—and neither will we. Thank you. (Applause.)Every day, America’s men and women in uniform demonstrate the infinite depth of love that dwells in the human heart.One of these American heroes was Army Staff Sergeant Christopher Hake. On his second deployment to Iraq in 2008, Sergeant Hake wrote a letter to his one-year-old son, Gage: “I will be with you again,” he wrote to Gage. “I will teach you to ride your first bike, build your first sand box, watch you play sports, and see you have kids also. I love you son. Take care of your mother. I am always with you. Daddy.”On Easter Sunday of 2008, Chris was out on patrol in Baghdad when his Bradley Fighting Vehicle was hit by a roadside bomb. That night, he made the ultimate sacrifice for our country. Sergeant Hake now rests in eternal glory in Arlington, and his wife Kelli is in the Gallery tonight, joined by their son, who is now a 13-year-old and doing very, very well. To Kelli and Gage: Chris will live in our hearts forever. He is looking down on you now. Thank you. (Applause.) Thank you very much. Thank you both very much.The terrorist responsible for killing Sergeant Hake was Qasem Soleimani, who provided the deadly roadside bomb that took Chris’s life. Soleimani was the Iranian regime’s most ruthless butcher, a monster who murdered or wounded thousands of American service members in Iraq. As the world’s top terrorist, Soleimani orchestrated the deaths of countless men, women, and children. He directed the December assault and went on to assault U.S. forces in Iraq. Was actively planning new attacks when we hit him very hard. And that’s why, last month, at my direction, the U.S. military executed a flawless precision strike that killed Soleimani and terminated his evil reign of terror forever. (Applause.)Our message to the terrorists is clear: You will never escape American justice. If you attack our citizens, you forfeit your life. (Applause.)In recent months, we have seen proud Iranians raise their voices against their oppressive rulers. The Iranian regime must abandon its pursuit of nuclear weapons; stop spreading terror, death, and destruction; and start working for the good of its own people.Because of our powerful sanctions, the Iranian economy is doing very, very poorly. We can help them make a very good and short-time recovery. It can all go very quickly, but perhaps they are too proud or too foolish to ask for that help. We are here. Let’s see which road they choose. It is totally up to them. (Applause.)As we defend American lives, we are working to end America’s wars in the Middle East.In Afghanistan, the determination and valor of our warfighters has allowed us to make tremendous progress, and peace talks are now underway. I am not looking to kill hundreds of thousands of people in Afghanistan, many of them totally innocent. It is also not our function to serve other nations as law enforcement agencies. These are warfighters that we have—the best in the world—and they either want to fight to win or not fight at all. We are working to finally end America’s longest war and bring our troops back home. (Applause.)War places a heavy burden on our nation’s extraordinary military families, especially spouses like Amy Williams from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and her two children—six-year-old Elliana and three-year-old Rowan. Amy works full-time and volunteers countless hours helping other military families. For the past seven months, she has done it all while her husband, Sergeant First Class Townsend Williams, is in Afghanistan on his fourth deployment in the Middle East. Amy’s kids haven’t seen their father’s face in many months. Amy, your family’s sacrifice makes it possible for all of our families to live in safety and in peace, and we want to thank you. Thank you, Amy. (Applause.)But, Amy, there is one more thing. Tonight, we have a very special surprise. I am thrilled to inform you that your husband is back from deployment. He is here with us tonight, and we couldn’t keep him waiting any longer. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Welcome home, Sergeant Williams. Thank you very much.As the world bears witness tonight, America is a land of heroes. This is a place where greatness is born, where destinies are forged, and where legends come to life. This is the home of Thomas Edison and Teddy Roosevelt, of many great generals including Washington, Pershing, Patton, and MacArthur. This is the home of Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass, Amelia Earhart, Harriet Tubman, the Wright Brothers, Neil Armstrong, and so many more. This is the country where children learn names like Wyatt Earp, Davy Crockett, and Annie Oakley. This is the place where the pilgrims landed at Plymouth and where Texas patriots made their last stand at the Alamo—(applause)—the beautiful, beautiful Alamo.The American nation was carved out of the vast frontier by the toughest, strongest, fiercest, and most determined men and women ever to walk on the face of the Earth. Our ancestors braved the unknown; tamed the wilderness; settled the Wild West; lifted millions from poverty, disease, and hunger; vanquished tyranny and fascism; ushered the world to new heights of science and medicine; laid down the railroads, dug out the canals, raised up the skyscrapers. And, ladies and gentlemen, our ancestors built the most exceptional republic ever to exist in all of human history, and we are making it greater than ever before. (Applause.)This is our glorious and magnificent inheritance. We are Americans. We are pioneers. We are the pathfinders. We settled the New World, we built the modern world, and we changed history forever by embracing the eternal truth that everyone is made equal by the hand of Almighty God. (Applause.)America is the place where anything can happen. America is the place where anyone can rise. And here, on this land, on this soil, on this continent, the most incredible dreams come true.This nation is our canvas, and this country is our masterpiece. We look at tomorrow and see unlimited frontiers just waiting to be explored. Our brightest discoveries are not yet known. Our most thrilling stories are not yet told. Our grandest journeys are not yet made. The American Age, the American Epic, the American adventure has only just begun.Our spirit is still young, the sun is still rising, God’s grace is still shining, and, my fellow Americans, the best is yet to come. (Applause.)Thank you. God Bless You. And God Bless America. Thank you very much. (Applause.) THE PRESIDENT: Well, thank you very much and thank you, Jeanne. It is my profound honor to be the first President in history to attend the March for Life. (Applause.) We’re here for a very simple reason: to defend the right of every child, born and unborn, to fulfill their God-given potential. (Applause.)For 47 years, Americans of all backgrounds have traveled from across the country to stand for life. And today, as President of the United States, I am truly proud to stand with you. (Applause.)I want to welcome tens of thousands — this is a tremendous turnout — tens of thousands of high school and college students who took long bus rides — (applause) — to be here in our nation’s capital. And to make you feel even better, there are tens of thousands of people outside that we passed on the way in. If anyone would like to give up their spot, we can work that out. (Laughter.) You have a tremendous group of people outside. Thousands and thousands wanted to get in. This is some great success. (Applause.) Young people are the heart of the March for Life, and it’s your generation that is making America the pro-family, pro-life nation. (Applause.)The life movement is led by strong women, amazing faith leaders, and brave students who carry on the legacy of pioneers before us who fought to raise the conscience of our nation and uphold the rights of our citizens. You embrace mothers with care and compassion. You are powered by prayer, and motivated by pure, unselfish love.You’re grateful — and we are so grateful — these are incredible people — to be joined by Secretary Alex Azar and Kellyanne Conway. (Applause.) Thank you.And thanks also to Senators Mike Lee and James Lankford, who are here. James, Mike — thank you, fellas. And Representatives Steve Scalise — (applause); Chris Smith — (applause); Ralph Abraham — (applause); Warren Davidson — (applause); Bob Latta — (applause); John Joyce — (applause); Lloyd Smucker — (applause); Brian Fitzpatrick — (applause); and Brad Wenstrup. (Applause.) Thank you, all. (Applause.)And I have to say — and I look at it — I see it exactly — we have many, many more politicians in the audience. But, if you don’t mind, I won’t introduce them all. (Laughter.)All of us here today understand an eternal truth: Every child is a precious and sacred gift from God. (Applause.) Together, we must protect, cherish, and defend the dignity and sanctity of every human life. (Applause.)When we see the image of a baby in the womb, we glimpse the majesty of God’s creation. (Applause.) When we hold a newborn in our arms, we know the endless love that each child brings to a family. When we watch a child grow, we see the splendor that radiates from each human soul. One life changes the world. From my family — and I can tell you, I send love and I send great, great love.And from the first day in office, I’ve taken a historic action to support America’s families and to protect the unborn. (Applause.) And during my first week in office, I reinstated and expanded the Mexico City Policy, and we issued a landmark pro-life rule to govern the use of Title X taxpayer funding. (Applause.)I notified Congress that I would veto any legislation that weakens pro-life policies or that encourages the destruction of human life. (Applause.)At the United Nations, I made clear that global bureaucrats have no business attacking the sovereignty of nations that protect innocent life. (Applause.)Unborn children have never had a stronger defender in the White House. (Applause.) And as the Bible tells us, each person is “wonderfully made.” (Applause.)We have taken decisive action to protect the religious liberty –- so important. Religious liberty has been under attack all over the world, and, frankly, very strongly attacked in our nation. You see it better than anyone. But we are stopping it, and we’re taking care of doctors, nurses, teachers, and groups like the Little Sisters of the Poor. (Applause.) We are preserving faith-based adoption. (Applause.)And to uphold our founding documents, we have confirmed 187 federal judges — (applause) — who apply the Constitution as written, including two phenomenal Supreme Court Justices: Neil Gorsuch and Brett Kavanaugh. (Applause.)We are protecting pro-life students’ right to free speech on college campuses. (Applause.) And if universities want federal taxpayer dollars, then they must uphold your First Amendment right to speak your mind. And if they don’t, they pay a very big financial penalty, which they will not be willing to pay. (Applause.)Sadly, the far-left is actively working to erase our God-given rights, shut down faith-based charities, ban religious believers from the public square, and silence Americans who believe in the sanctity of life. They are coming after me because I am fighting for you and we are fighting for those who have no voice. And we will win because we know how to win. (Applause.) We all know how to win. We all know how to win. You’ve been winning for a long time. You’ve been winning for a long time. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Four more years! Four more years! Four more years!THE PRESIDENT: Together, we are the voice for the voiceless. When it comes to abortion, Democrats is a — and you know this, you’ve seen what’s happened — Democrats have embraced the most radical and extreme positions taken and seen in this country for years, and decades — and you can even say “for centuries.”AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: Nearly every top Democrat in Congress now supports taxpayer-funded abortion, all the way up until the moment of birth.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: Last year, lawmakers in New York cheered with delight upon the passage of legislation that would allow a baby to be ripped from the mother’s womb right up until delivery.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: Then, we had the case of the Democrat governor in the state of Virginia — the Commonwealth of Virginia.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: And we love the Commonwealth of Virginia, but what is going on in Virginia? What is going on? The Governor stated that he would execute a baby after birth. You remember that.Senate Democrats even blocked legislation that would give medical care to babies who survive attempted abortions. That’s why I’ve called on Congress — two of our great senators here, so many of our congressmen here — and called upon them to defend the dignity of life and to pass legislation prohibiting late-term abortion of children who can feel pain in their mother’s womb. (Applause.)This year, the March for Life is celebrating the 100th anniversary of the 19th Amendment, which forever enshrined women’s rights to vote in the United States — (applause) — and given by the United States Constitution. Such a big event. (Applause.)Today, millions of extraordinary women across America are using the power of their votes to fight for the right, and all of their rights, as given in the Declaration of Independence –- it’s the right to life. To all the women here today: Your devotion and your leadership uplifts our entire nation, and we thank you for that.The tens of thousands of Americans gathered today not only stand for life — it’s really that they stand for it so proudly together, and I want to thank everybody for that.You stand for life each and every day. You provide housing, education, jobs, and medical care to the women that you serve. You find loving families for children in need of a forever home. You host baby showers for expecting moms. You make –- you just make it your life’s mission to help spread God’s grace.And to all of the moms here today: We celebrate you, and we declare that mothers are heroes. (Applause.) That’s true. Your strength, devotion, and drive is what powers our nation. And, because of you, our country has been blessed with amazing souls who have changed the course of human history.We cannot know what our citizens yet unborn will achieve, the dreams they will imagine, the masterpieces they will create, the discoveries they will make. But we know this: Every life brings love into this world. Every child brings joy to a family. Every person is worth protecting. (Applause.) And above all, we know that every human soul is divine, and every human life –- born and unborn –- is made in the holy image of Almighty God. (Applause.)Together, we will defend this truth all across our magnificent land. We will set free the dreams of our people. And with determined hope, we look forward to all of the blessings that will come from the beauty, talent, purpose, nobility, and grace of every American child.I want to thank you. This is a very special moment. It’s so great to represent you. I love you all and –- (applause) — and I say with true passion: Thank you. God bless you. And God bless America. Thank you all. Thank you. (Applause.) As long as I am President of the United States, Iran will never be allowed to have a nuclear weapon.Good morning.I’m pleased to inform you: The American people should be extremely grateful and happy no Americans were harmed in last night’s attack by the Iranian regime.We suffered no casualties, all of our soldiers are safe, and only minimal damage was sustained at our military bases.Our great American forces are prepared for anything.Iran appears to be standing down, which is a good thing for all parties concerned and a very good thing for the world.No American or Iraqi lives were lost because of the precautions taken, the dispersal of forces, and an early warning system that worked very well.I salute the incredible skill and courage of America’s men and women in uniform.For far too long — all the way back to 1979, to be exact — nations have tolerated Iran’s destructive and destabilizing behavior in the Middle East and beyond.Those days are over.Iran has been the leading sponsor of terrorism, and their pursuit of nuclear weapons threatens the civilized world.We will never let that happen.Last week, we took decisive action to stop a ruthless terrorist from threatening American lives.At my direction, the United States military eliminated the world’s top terrorist, Qasem Soleimani.As the head of the Quds Force, Soleimani was personally responsible for some of the absolutely worst atrocities.He trained terrorist armies, including Hezbollah, launching terrorist strikes against civilian targets.He fueled bloody civil wars all across the region.He viciously wounded and murdered thousands of U.S. troops, including the planting of roadside bombs that maim and dismember their victims.Soleimani directed the recent attacks on USpersonnel in Iraq that badly wounded four service members and killed one American, and he orchestrated the violent assault on the USembassy in Baghdad.In recent days, he was planning new attacks on American targets, but we stopped him.Soleimani’s hands were drenched in both American and Iranian blood.He should have been terminated long ago.By removing Soleimani, we have sent a powerful message to terrorists: If you value your own life, you will not threaten the lives of our people.As we continue to evaluate options in response to Iranian aggression, the United States will immediately impose additional punishing economic sanctions on the Iranian regime.These powerful sanctions will remain until Iran changes its behavior.In recent months alone, Iran has seized ships in international waters, fired an unprovoked strike on Saudi Arabia, and shot down two USdrones.Iran’s hostilities substantially increased after the foolish Iran nuclear deal was signed in 2013, and they were given $150 billion, not to mention $1.8 billion in cash.Instead of saying “thank you” to the United States, they chanted “death to America.”In fact, they chanted “death to America” the day the agreement was signed.Then, Iran went on a terror spree, funded by the money from the deal, and created hell in Yemen, Syria, Lebanon, Afghanistan, and Iraq.The missiles fired last night at us and our allies were paid for with the funds made available by the last administration.The regime also greatly tightened the reins on their own country, even recently killing 1,500 people at the many protests that are taking place all throughout Iran.The very defective JCPOA expires shortly anyway, and gives Iran a clear and quick path to nuclear breakout.Iran must abandon its nuclear ambitions and end its support for terrorism.The time has come for the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Russia, and China to recognize this reality.They must now break away from the remnants of the Iran deal -– or JCPOA –- and we must all work together toward making a deal with Iran that makes the world a safer and more peaceful place.We must also make a deal that allows Iran to thrive and prosper, and take advantage of its enormous untapped potential.Iran can be a great country.Peace and stability cannot prevail in the Middle East as long as Iran continues to foment violence, unrest, hatred, and war.The civilized world must send a clear and unified message to the Iranian regime: Your campaign of terror, murder, mayhem will not be tolerated any longer.It will not be allowed to go forward.Today, I am going to ask NATO to become much more involved in the Middle East process.Over the last three years, under my leadership, our economy is stronger than ever before and America has achieved energy independence.These historicaccomplishmentschanged our strategic priorities.These are accomplishments that nobody thought were possible.And options in the Middle East became available.We are now the number-one producer of oil and natural gas anywhere in the world.We are independent, and we do not need Middle East oil.The American military has been completely rebuilt under my administration, at a cost of $2.5 trillion.USArmed Forces are stronger than ever before.Our missiles are big, powerful, accurate, lethal, and fast.Under construction are many hypersonic missiles.The fact that we have this great military and equipment, however, does not mean we have to use it.We do not want to use it.American strength, both military and economic, is the best deterrent.Three months ago, after destroying 100 percent of ISIS and its territorial caliphate, we killed the savage leader of ISIS, al-Baghdadi, who was responsible for so much death, including the mass beheadings of Christians, Muslims, and all who stood in his way.He was a monster.Al-Baghdadi was trying again to rebuild the ISIS caliphate, and failed.Tens of thousands of ISIS fighters have been killed or captured during my administration.ISIS is a natural enemy of Iran The destruction of ISIS is good for Iran, and we should work together on this and other shared priorities.Finally, to the people and leaders of Iran: We want you to have a future and a great future — one that you deserve, one of prosperity at home, and harmony with the nations of the world.The United States is ready to embrace peace with all who seek it.I want to thank you, and God bless America. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you. Hello, everybody.Well, thank you very much.And good afternoon.As President, my highest and most solemn duty is the defense of our nation and its citizens.Last night, at my direction, the United States military successfully executed a flawless precision strike that killed the number-one terrorist anywhere in the world, Qasem Soleimani.Soleimani was plotting imminent and sinister attacks on American diplomats and military personnel, but we caught him in the act and terminated him.Under my leadership, America’s policy is unambiguous: To terrorists who harm or intend to harm any American, we will find you; we will eliminate you.We will always protect our diplomats, service members, all Americans, and our allies.For years, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps and its ruthless Quds Force — under Soleimani’s leadership — has targeted, injured, and murdered hundreds of American civilians and servicemen.The recent attacks on UStargets in Iraq, including rocket strikes that killed an American and injured four American servicemen very badly, as well as a violent assault on our embassy in Baghdad, were carried out at the direction of Soleimani.Soleimani made the death of innocent people his sick passion, contributing to terrorist plots as far away as New Delhi and London.Today we remember and honor the victims of Soleimani’s many atrocities, and we take comfort in knowing that his reign of terror is over.Soleimani has been perpetrating acts of terror to destabilize the Middle East for the last 20 years.What the United States did yesterday should have been done long ago.A lot of lives would have been saved.Just recently, Soleimani led the brutal repression of protestors in Iran, where more than a thousand innocent civilians were tortured and killed by their own government.We took action last night to stop a war.We did not take action to start a war.I have deep respect for the Iranian people.They are a remarkable people, with an incredible heritage and unlimited potential.We do not seek regime change.However, the Iranian regime’s aggression in the region, including the use of proxy fighters to destabilize its neighbors, must end, and it must end now.The future belongs to the people of Iran — those who seek peaceful coexistence and cooperation — not the terrorist warlords who plunder their nation to finance bloodshed abroad.The United States has the best military by far, anywhere in the world.We have best intelligence in the world.If Americans anywhere are threatened, we have all of those targets already fully identified, and I am ready and prepared to take whatever action is necessary.And that, in particular, refers to Iran.Under my leadership, we have destroyed the ISIS territorial caliphate, and recently, American Special Operations Forces killed the terrorist leader known as al-Baghdadi.The world is a safer place without these monsters.America will always pursue the interests of good people, great people, great souls, while seeking peace, harmony, and friendship with all of the nations of the world.Thank you.God bless you.God bless our great military.And God bless the United States of America.Thank you very much.Thank you. Last night, the United States brought the world’s number one terrorist leader to justice. Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi is dead. He was the founder and leader of ISIS, the most ruthless and violent terror organization in the World. The United States has been searching for Baghdadi for many years. Capturing or killing Baghdadi has been the top national security priority of my Administration. U.S. Special Operations forces executed a dangerous and daring nighttime raid into Northwestern Syria to accomplish this mission.No U.S. personnel were lost in the operation, while a large number of Baghdadi’s fighters and companions were killed with him. He died after running into a dead-end tunnel, whimpering and crying and screaming. The compound had been cleared by this time, with people either surrendering or being shot and killed. Eleven young children were moved out of the house un-injured. The only ones remaining were Baghdadi in the tunnel, who had dragged three children with him to certain death. He reached the end of the tunnel, as our dogs chased him down. He ignited his vest, killing himself and the three children. His body was mutilated by the blast, but test results gave certain and positive identification.The thug who tried so hard to intimidate others spent his last moments in utter fear, panic and dread – terrified of the American Forces bearing down.We were in the compound for approximately 2 hours, and after the mission was accomplished we took highly sensitive material and information from the raid.Baghdadi’s demise demonstrates America’s relentless pursuit of terrorist leaders, and our commitment to the enduring and total defeat of ISIS!The reach of America is long. As you know, last month we announced that we recently killed Hamza Bin Laden, the very violent son of Osama Bin Laden, who was saying very bad things.He was the heir apparent to Al Qaeda. Terrorists who oppress and murder innocent people should never sleep soundly, knowing that we will completely destroy them. These savage monsters will not escape their fate – and they will not escape the final judgement of God.Baghdadi has been on the run for many years, long before I took office. At my direction, as Commander-in-Chief, the United States obliterated his ‘caliphate’ in March of this year. Today’s events are another reminder that we will continue to pursue the remaining ISIS terrorists to their brutal end.Baghdadi and the losers who worked with him – in some cases people who had no idea what they were getting into and how dangerous and unglamorous it was – killed many people. Their murder of innocent Americans Jim Foley, Steven Sotloff, Peter Kassig, and Kayla Mueller were especially heinous. The shocking publicized murder of a Jordanian pilot who was burned alive in a cage for all to see, and the execution of Christians in Libya and Egypt, as well as the genocidal mass murder of Yazidis, rank ISIS among the most depraved organizations in history.The forced religious conversions, the orange suits prior to many beheadings, all of which were openly displayed for the world – this was all Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi’s work. He was vicious and violent, and he died in a vicious and violent way, as a coward, running and crying. This raid was impeccable, and could only have taken place with the acknowledgement and help of certain other nations and people.I want to thank the nations of Russia, Turkey, Syria and Iraq, and I also want to thank the Syrian Kurds for certain support they were able to give us. Thank you as well to the great intelligence professionals who helped make this very successful journey possible.I want to thank the soldiers, sailors, airmen, and marines involved in last night’s operation. You are the very best there is anywhere in the world. I want to thank General Mark Milley and our Joint Chiefs of Staff, and I also want to thank our professionals who work in other agencies of the United States government and were critical to the mission’s success.Last night was a great night for the United States and for the World. A brutal killer, one who has caused so much hardship and death, was violently eliminated – he will never again harm another innocent man, woman or child. He died like a dog. He died like a coward. The world is now a much safer place.God bless the United States of America! PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you very much. Thank you.Well, thank you all for being here. We’ve had a tremendous three days in New York, at the United Nations. I want to thank the Secretary-General. It’s been really incredible what’s been taking place. And he’s been a fantastic host to a lot of countries.The meetings I had on a bilat, or close, were pretty staggering. I think we set a new record, but you’ll have to check that out. The — we met very, very — for pretty extended periods of time, either two and two, one on one, or just about at that level with Pakistan, Poland, New Zealand, Singapore, Egypt, South Korea, United Kingdom, India, Iraq, Argentina, Germany, Brazil, France, Japan, Ukraine, Honduras, El Salvador, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, UAE, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru. Other than that, we weren’t too busy over the last three days.And, unfortunately, the press doesn’t even cover it. You know, we have — we’ve made some fantastic deals, like with Japan. For farmers, we have a tremendous trade deal with Japan. And that doesn’t get covered because you waste your time on nonsense.The PMI manufacturers’ index has gone substantially up, which was an incredible — Larry Kudlow, wherever you may be — Larry, please stand up. He just gave me these numbers. And existing new home sales are through the roof. Just came out. Oil prices have gone down ever since the Saudi Arabia incident, and they’ve gone down very substantially. So, we have plenty of oil. But those numbers were surprising to you, Larry. And the extent of the increase. Is that a correct statement? So thank you, Larry Kudlow.We think we’ll make this little announcement to you because — important. You know the so-called whistleblower? The one that didn’t have any first-class, or first-rate, or second-tier information, from what I understand. You’ll have to figure that out for yourself. But I’ve spoken with Leader Kevin McCarthy and the Republicans — many of them — and we were going to do this anyway, but I’ve informed them — all of the House members — that I fully support transparency on the so-called whistleblower information, even though it was supposedly second-hand information, which is sort of interesting.And other things have come out about the whistleblower that are also maybe even more interesting. But also insist on transparency from Joe Biden and his son Hunter on the millions of dollars that have been quickly and easily taken out of Ukraine and China. Millions of dollars. Millions and millions of dollars taken out very rapidly while he was Vice President. And I think they should have transparency for that. I’ve informed the Leader about that.And additionally, I demand transparency from Democrats who went to Ukraine and attempted to force the new President, who I met and is an outstanding person. I just met a little while ago; some of you were there. I think he’s going to be outstanding. He got elected on the basis of corruption. He wants to end corruption in Ukraine, and I think that’s great.But they went there and they wanted to force the new President to do things that they wanted under the form of political threat. They threatened him if he didn’t do things. Now, that’s what they’re accusing me of, but I didn’t do it. I didn’t threaten anybody. In fact, the press was asking questions of the President of Ukraine. And he said, “No pressure.” I used the word “pressure.” I think he used the word “push,” but he meant pressure, but it’s the same thing. No push, no pressure, no nothing. It’s all a hoax, folks. It’s all a big hoax.And the sad thing about this hoax is that we work so hard with all of these countries — and I mean really hard. This has been — I’ve been up from early in the morning to late in the evening, and meeting with different countries all for the good of our country, and the press doesn’t even cover all of this. And it’s disappearing — it’s really disappointing also to those countries that are with us and spend so much time with us.So, we want transparency. We’ve informed Kevin McCarthy about transparency. And we said, “Vote for it.” So I think you’ll have close to 100 percent of the Republican votes, I hope.And it got almost no attention, but in May, CNN reported that Senators Robert Menendez, Richard Durbin, and Patrick Leahy wrote a letter to Ukraine’s Prosecutor General expressing concern at the closing of four investigations they said were “critical.” In the letter, they implied that their support for U.S. assistance to Ukraine was at stake and that if they didn’t do the right thing, they wouldn’t get any assistance. Gee, doesn’t that sound familiar? Doesn’t that sound familiar?And Chris Murphy — who I’ve been dealing with on guns — you know, so nice. He’s always, “Oh, no, we want to work it out. We want to work it out.” But they’re too busy wasting their time on the witch hunt. So, Senator Chris Murphy literally threatened the President of Ukraine that, if he doesn’t do things right, they won’t have Democrat support in Congress. So you’re going to look all of this up.One other thing — I’m just going off of certain notes and elements of what we’ve been doing over the last three days, but this just came up a few minutes ago: The “Amazon-Washington Post” just put out a fake article that Acting Director of National Intelligence, Joseph Maguire — who I’ve gotten to know, and he’s a tough cookie — and I was surprised; I was shocked to hear this — was going to quit, blaming the White House for something that they wouldn’t let him talk openly, freely. And I was shocked because I know Joe, and he’s tough. A tough guy.And I was really surprised to hear he was going to quit. Before I could even either talk to him or talk to anybody else, he put out a statement — I didn’t speak to Joe yet — but he said, “At no time have I considered resigning my position.” In other words, the story in the Washington Post was a fake.“At no time have I considered resigning my position since assuming this role on August 16, 2019. I have never quit anything in my life, and I am not going to start now. I’m committed to leading the intelligence community to address the diverse and complex threats facing our nation.” That’s from the Acting Director of National Intelligence, a very good man, Joseph Maguire.So we’re having a great period of time. Our country is the strongest it’s ever been economically. Our numbers are phenomenal. Wilbur, thank you. And Larry. Everybody. The numbers are phenomenal. Our economy is the strongest in the world. We’re the largest economy in the world.Had my opponent won, we would be second right now because China was catching us so rapidly, we would’ve been second by this time. And unless somebody does a very poor job as President, we’re going to be first for a long way, because we’ve picked up trillions and trillions of dollars in value and worth of our country, and China has lost trillions and trillions of dollars, and millions of jobs, and their supply chain. And they want to make a deal.This year, America came to the United Nations stronger than we have ever been before: Since my election, the United States has not only brought our economy to a level that we have never seen, the most jobs that we’ve ever had — you know you’ve heard me say it many times — African American, Asian American, Hispanic American, the best unemployment numbers we’ve ever had. And the most and best employment numbers: 160 million — very close to that number — in jobs. We’ve never been anywhere close.Wages are up, and inequality is down. Something that people don’t like writing about. But wages are up. I used to speak during the campaign, and I’d talk about wages where people were making less money three years ago than they were making 21 years, 22 years ago, and they’d have two jobs and three jobs. When I say “three years ago,” I’m talking into the area sometime prior to the election. And they were doing very badly. And now, for the first time in many years, wages are up and employment is up, and unemployment is down. And it’s a beautiful thing to watch.In a week of active and ambitious diplomacy here at the United Nations, America renewed our friendships. We advanced our values greatly and made clear to everyone that the United States will always defend our citizens to promote prosperity.I met with Prime Minister Boris Johnson, at length, of the United Kingdom, continuing our discussions on a magnificent, new bilateral trade deal. So we’ll see what happens with respect to Brexit, but I suspect we’ll have a fantastic deal with the UK. It should be much bigger than it has been over the last number of years. Over the last 20 years, frankly. It should be a much bigger deal.That’s true with many countries. We’re going to have much bigger trade deals with a lot of countries that have an opportunity to come. And they all want to do business with the United States, especially now.Earlier today, I stood alongside Prime Minister Abe of Japan — a friend of mine, a great gentleman. Had a great reelection. And we signed a terrific new trade deal, which tremendously helps our farmers and ranchers, and technology. The technology companies are really big beneficiaries.We also held very productive conversations with leaders of Pakistan, India. And many other nations are achieving stronger ties of fair and reciprocal trade. And with respect to Pakistan and India, we talked about Kashmir. And whatever help I can be, I said — I offered, whether it’s arbitration or mediation, or whatever it has to be, I’ll do whatever I can. Because they’re at very serious odds right now, and hopefully that’ll get better.You look at the two gentlemen heading those two countries — two good friends of mine — I said, “Fellas, work it out. Just work it out.” Those are two nuclear countries. They’ve got to work it out.This week, we also made incredible strides on national security with President Duda of Poland. We signed a joint declaration advancing defense cooperation. And, crucially, Poland has agreed to put up 100 percent of the money — something I don’t think you’ve ever heard said before. But they’re going to put up 100 percent of the money, of hosting additional U.S. military personnel that we’ll be taking from various other countries. We won’t have more over; we’ll have — we’ll be moving them around.Poland is building us phenomenal new facilities. They’re spending everything, and they’re going to really do a job. But we’ll be moving a few thousand soldiers, and Poland will be paying that for it.Together with Prime Minister Lee of Singapore, I signed an important agreement extending our defense cooperation. This hasn’t been changed in many years. Then, yesterday, I met with prospective members of the Middle East Strategic Alliance, which is a group that I know very well; I know all of them. And through this effort, the nations of the Middle East are taking more responsibility for securing their own future and their own neighborhood. And they’re also reimbursing us and paying us for a lot of the military work that we incredibly do.But because we’re now independent, energy-wise — we’re energy independent — we have very few boats going over the Middle East. We used to have them going through the Straits all the time. And you probably noticed that, every once in a while, they go after somebody else’s. They haven’t gone after ours yet. If they do, they’ve get big problems. But we have very few boats going over there. They were saying the other day, they’ve never attacked an American boat, and I’m not asking for trouble. But if they do, they know they have far bigger trouble. But then they said, “But, you know, we don’t see very many American boats over here anymore.”This week also brought extraordinary progress to nations of our own hemisphere. In recent days, we’ve achieved historic asylum cooperation agreements with El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. We were with El Salvador today. A great young gentleman became the President. He’s strong and tough, and he’s taking care of crime. He was really something today. I was very impressed with him. And likewise with Honduras, who we met. We signed a cooperation agreement with both, and also with Guatemala.We’re working with our partners in Central America to ensure that asylum-seekers can pursue relief as close to their home countries as possible. That’ll make a tremendous difference at our southern border.And Mexico — I have to say, President Lopez Obrador has been outstanding — an outstanding partner. And he’s doing a great job in Mexico. The cartels are way down, and the numbers — our Secretary is here now — the numbers are way down. Way, way down. And we’re doing that without the help of Congress, meaning the Democrats in Congress who won’t give us a single vote to take care of loopholes.We have loopholes that are so horrible, and it would be so easy to fix. And they know they should be fixed but they don’t want to do because they don’t want to give Trump any credit because it’s all about the election. That’s all they care about. They don’t care about our country; they care about the election.And the sad part is, with all of the tremendous work that we’ve done this weekend — whether it’s Secretary Mnuchin or Secretary Pompeo, who had some outstanding, outstanding meetings — with all of this tremendous work that we’ve done, the press doesn’t even cover it. And the Democrats did this hoax during the United Nations week. It was perfect. Because this way, it takes away from these tremendous achievements that we’re taking care of doing, that we’re involved in in New York City, at the United Nations.So that was all planned, like everything else. It was all planned. And the witch hunt continues, but they’re getting hit hard in this witch hunt, because when they look at the information, it’s a joke. Impeachment? For that? When you have a wonderful meeting, or you have a wonderful phone conversation?I think you should ask. We actually — you know, that was the second conversation. I think you should ask for the first conversation also. I can’t believe they haven’t, although I heard there’s a — there’s a rumor out they want the first conversation. It was beautiful. It was just a perfect conversation.But I think you should do that. I think you should do, and I think you should ask for VP Pence’s conversation because he had a couple conversations also. I can save you a lot of time. They’re all perfect. Nothing was mentioned of any import other than congratulations. But the word is that they’re going to ask for the first phone conversation. You can have it anytime you need it. And also Mike Pence’s conversations, which were, I think, one or two of them. They were perfect. They were all perfect.It’s very sad what the Democrats are doing to this country. They’re dividing. They’re belittling. They’re demeaning our country. So many leaders came up to me today and they said, “Sir, what you go through, no President has ever gone through. And it’s so bad for your country.” People laugh at the stupidity of what they’ve asked for. And here we could do asylum. We could do all of these different things so easily. We could do asylum quickly. We could do loopholes; get rid of them.Instead, we actually made deals with Mexico and with Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras. And we’re doing it with them instead of with our Congress, but we’re doing it. We get it done.The wall is being built, by the way. It got little coverage. I went to the border. It’s going up in New Mexico. It’s going up in Arizona. It’s going up in California, believe it or not. They really wanted that wall in California, in San Diego. As soon as it was completed, they said, “We don’t want a wall.” They were begging me for a wall. I should take it out and move it to another location.We were with the Governor — spoke to him a lot — but the Governor of Texas, Lieutenant Governor of Texas, Attorney General of Texas, the senators of Texas — Cornyn, Ted Cruz. And we’re building an incredible wall. That’s going to — number one, it’s going to look great. It’s going to be virtually impossible to cross unless you’re one hell of a mountain climber. It’s very tough. It’s going to be very tough to get people and drugs over those walls, because they’re the real deal.I went to the Secretary of Homeland security, and he got all his people together. I said, “Give me four walls — your optimum. Every single thing included.” And they give me 20 percent less, 20 percent less, and 20 percent less — meaning, less cost. They came back, they said, “This is the wall, sir. This would be the best.” We have the panels on top, which are anti-climb panels. I don’t know if you noticed the steel on top. We have a different design for a different area, but this anti-climb is very tough. They’ve — we had people going out and real climbers telling us which is the toughest to climb. But these are anti-climb panels. Very tough to get across.And the wall is going up, many miles a week. And we hope to have over 400, but maybe as much as 500 miles, which we’ll pretty much do it because you have a lot of natural barriers; you have mountains, you have really rough rivers. You have some really rough land that you can’t cross very easily. So they serve as their natural walls. But we — we’ll have, we think, over 400, but we could even have 500 miles.To combat the malice, corruption of both the Venezuelan and Iranian dictatorships, today I issued proclamations suspending the entry into the United States of senior regime officials and their families.And further, to promote American values, on Monday I was proud to be the first President in history to host a meeting at the United Nations —I’m so surprised; first President for this. I can’t believe that I’m first. I spoke to Franklin Graham about that. I can’t believe it.— at the United Nations, on protecting religious freedom and liberty for people around the world.While some partisans and unelected bureaucrats in Washington may choose to fight every day against the interests and beliefs of the American people, my administration is standing up for the American people like no administration has in many, many years. You forgot the American people. You totally forgot the American people.This week, every — every week, I really can say — of my presidency, we’re standing up for American prosperity, American security, and the American way of life. And together, with our friends and partners, we’re building a more peaceful, prosperous, and promising future.We have a tremendous relationship now with a lot of nations that are very happy with what’s going on, and that includes in South America, where they’ve been so helpful, where nobody thought this would be possible. The relationship with Mexico is an example, or El Salvador, or Honduras, or Guatemala. Nobody even knew about it. Yet, we sent them hundreds of millions of dollars, and all we got back was caravans of people pouring in.We had tremendous — we had tremendous — it was terrible. And we’ve got that stopped, and the countries are now helping us. And we stopped those payments, by the way. We don’t pay those countries that money anymore. But I will tell you, if they’re as good as they seem to be — they’re really doing a job on crime and stopping the wrong people from leaving and coming to the United States — we’ll be helping them a lot with economic development projects and other things.So, with that, we had a tremendous three days. It was beautiful to see. Made a lot of new friends. I read you a list of all the countries I saw pretty much one on one. And it’s been very busy, but it’s been very, very fruitful.So we could take a couple of questions. I’d love some questions on some of the things that we accomplished at UNGA, instead of the witch hunt — the phony witch hunt questions, which I know that’s what you want to ask because it’s probably better for you, but it’s not better for the country.So maybe we’ll take a few — a few questions. Please.Q Thank you, Mr. President. You suggested that you didn’t do anything wrong in the course of your conversations with the Ukrainian President. But can you explain to the American people why it is appropriate for an American President to ask a foreign leader for information about a political rival, and what you would have said if you discovered that Barack Obama perhaps had asked a foreign leader for information about you before your campaign for the presidency?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Yeah. Well, that’s what he did, isn’t it, really? When you think about it.Look, that whole witch hunt was started, and hopefully that’ll all come out. But there’s been some fantastic books written that just came out — whether you will look at Gregg Jarrett, or McCarthy’s book that just — just came out recently, and so many other books. And a lot of books are coming out. When you start reading those books, you see what they did to us. What they’ve done to this country is a disgrace. They’ve hurt this country very badly. And no other President should have to go through what I’ve gone through.The President — the new President of Ukraine is looking to stop corruption. There’s a lot of corruption going on, and there was corruption. I just told you about senators that threatened him with votes and no money coming into Ukraine if they do things. That’s really what people are trying to say that I did, but the only difference is I didn’t do it. You take a look at that call; it was perfect. I didn’t do it. There was no quid pro quo, but there was with Biden and there was with these senators. And they threatened. They said, “You do this, you do that. We’re not going to give you votes.” That’s — that’s the real deal.So we have an honest group of people that have been maligned. And, you know, it’s — a lot of people say I’ll do even better. I’m very happy. Yesterday, I guess we had a 53 poll, and a lot of people say add 10 points to anything. Anybody voting for Trump, you can add — anytime you get a poll, you can add 10 points or 7 points or 6 points. Take it any way you want. But I don’t know if I consider that to be a compliment, but in one way it is a compliment.And I guess that’s what happened in the last election: Far more people came to vote than anybody thought possible.Q So why should the American people then be comfortable with an American President asking a foreign leader for information about an American citizen?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Well, I think you can look at your senators and you can look at Biden, and you can look at all these other people. But what we’re looking for is corruption. An investigation started, called the “Russian witch hunt,” affectionately. And it was a total phony scam. It was set up by people within the government to try and stop somebody from getting elected.And after that person — namely, me — won, and convincingly won at 306 to 223 in the Electoral College — which, by the way, when you run a race, if you’re running electoral — you know, if you go by the College, Electoral College, that’s a much different race than running popular vote. And it’s like the hundred-yard dash or the mile. You train differently.And I can’t help it that my opponent didn’t go to Wisconsin and should have gone much more to Michigan and Pennsylvania and other places. But that’s the way it is. We won election, convincingly. Convincingly. And then you had the text message on, “Well, if she doesn’t win, we’ve got an insurance policy.” How bad was that? You know the insurance policy? That’s sort of what has been taking place over the last number of years — the insurance policy.No, there are a lot of very dishonest people. We’re the ones that played it straight. And you know what? The millions of people out there that are looking at what’s going on — those people understand it. They see it. And they think it’s disgusting. And our people are being hurt, and our country is being hurt.When Nancy Pelosi allows her position to be taken over by radical far-left socialists, or worse, that’s pretty bad. That’s pretty bad — especially when the senators and all of these other people have actually done what they’re accusing me of doing, which I didn’t do.I’m going to have Mike Pompeo say a couple of words. I’m going to have Steve Mnuchin say a couple of words. And then we’ll do a couple of more questions.SECRETARY POMPEO: Mr. President, I thought I’d start by talking about Iran. We had a productive week. We saw the Europeans take a position with respect to the attacks that took place in Saudi Arabia, making clear this was Iran, just as President Trump and I had been saying, and have now joined us in saying that the existing JCPOA framework is not going to work, it’s not going to solve the world’s problems, it’s not going to create Middle East stability.Then we had a good set of meetings with our Middle East allies as well. The President joined for a meeting of the GCC where we talked again about how we can help deter. We want peace. We want a peaceful resolution with the Islamic Republic of Iran. We’re hoping we can get that way. In the end, it’ll be up to the Iranians to make that decision, whether they’ll choose violence and hate — and the President said in his speech yesterday to the General Assembly — if their bloodthirst will continue.We hope that’s the (inaudible). We hope we can get the opportunity to negotiate with them and get an outcome that’s good for both of them, for the United States, to make sure that they never have a nuclear weapon and that they can’t foment their terror with ballistic missiles and in the way they have all around the world. And I think we made real progress uniting the world on that here over these past few days. Thank you.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you.SECRETARY MNUCHIN: As Secretary Pompeo said on Iran, we had very good discussions with all of our allies about the sanctions program, which is the maximum pressure, and unity on the sanctions program. The Europeans made it very clear they would not do anything without our consent.And then, on the economic front, we had the entire economic team here for all the meetings: Secretary Ross, Larry Kudlow; Ambassador Lighthizer just left to go back to D.C. He’s working hard on trying to get USMCA passed. But we had a lot of productive discussions. The Japanese trade deal and a lot of discussions on investing in the U.S., more jobs in the U.S., and more trade. Thank you.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Okay. Go ahead, please.Q Thank you. Kristina Partsinevelos, Fox Business. I want to focus on markets, because I’ll leave it to everybody else to talk about impeachment. Markets reacted positively after you spoke about China, and that it would happen sooner than — rather than unexpectedly.Yet, you have the Foreign Minister of China saying that they have no intention of, you know, unseating the United States. And yet, they’re investing heavily in infrastructure and military.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Not anymore, maybe.Q But what — what is different this time, though?PRESIDENT TRUMP: And maybe they just say that, Kristina.Q What is different this time, though? The fact that you’re saying it’s progressing.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Oh, I just think it’s progressing. I think they want to make a deal. They’re losing their supply chain. You know, it’s getting killed.Q Do you have something specific?THE PRESIDENT: Well, I don’t want to say that. But I can tell you that these two men — and, in this case, more specifically, Steve, we’re having some very good conversations.And I guess it’s next week that a group is coming in and the week after. So we have a lot of — we have a lot of talks going on, and also by telephone.They want to make a deal. And you know why they want to make a deal? Because they’re losing their jobs, and because their supply chain is going to hell. And companies are moving out of China, and they’re moving to lots of other places, including the United States. And that’s not good; that’s far worse than they thought.And, by the way, in the meantime, we’re taking in billions and billions of dollars in tariffs. We’re taking in tremendous numbers in tariffs. And we’re helping our farmers who got targeted. Now, by the way, China is starting to buy our agricultural product again. They’re starting to go with the beef and all of the different things — pork. Very big on pork.But if you look and if you see — and they actually put out, I think, a statement. But they’re starting, very heavy, to buy our ag again. No, they want to make a deal. And they should want to make a deal. The question is: Do we want to make a deal?Q If USMCA doesn’t pass through Congress, is that it for NAFTA?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Well, that would be a shame. Well, I don’t want to answer that question, but you know how I feel about NAFTA. I think NAFTA is the worst trade deal ever made, although I also happen to think World Trade Organization was not one of the greats. Not one of the greats. That was the creation of China, which went like a rocket ship from the day they signed. It was — it was terrible.But, no, we’re going to find out. That’s going to be a very interesting question, with Nancy and Chuck and all of these people focusing on the witch hunt because they can’t beat us at the ballot. They can’t beat us at the ballot. And they’re not going to win the presidential. We’re having great polls. We have internal polls that are — Ohio, Iowa. Pennsylvania is looking good. North Carolina.We just won two races that a lot of people — we thought we were going to lose both of those races. One was down 17 points three weeks before the race, and he ended up winning by a substantial margin — by a substantial margin. And — Dan Bishop.And then we had a second race, as you know, and he was up one or two points and ended up winning by — what was it? Twenty-five points or some incredible — I’ll ask you folks because I don’t want to be inaccurate. Otherwise, I’ll have a front-page story: “We have breaking news. Trump exaggerated.”But he won by many, many points. And he was leading by maybe two, maybe three, but he won by — in the twenties. So it’s — it’s been — so we’re looking great in North Carolina, looking great in Florida.And you had one or two congressmen Democrats say, “Listen, we can’t beat them at the election, so let’s impeach him.” Right? Didn’t you hear — Al Green. That’s a beauty. He’s a real beauty, that guy. But he said, very distinctively, it’s all — it was all over the place. I don’t know — they’re trying to lose that tape, I guess.But he said, “We can’t…” Essentially, he said, “We can’t beat him. Let’s impeach him.” That’s pretty — that’s pretty dangerous stuff.Steve, go ahead.Q Thank you, sir. You had expressed some concerns about the precedent of releasing the transcript.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Yeah. I don’t like it.Q Why did you go ahead and do it?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Because I was getting such fake news, and I just thought it would be better. And now they’re asking for the first phone conversation, and I’ll release that too, if it’s important to you. But they’re asking for — because I had a conversation previous — on a previous election plateau that he had hit. The — the current president hit a couple of different plateaus. And I spoke to him, previous to the call that we released, which was a very innocent call — very, very innocent; very nice call.And as he said, we were — “I wasn’t pushed. I wasn’t pushed,” meaning pressured. He wasn’t pressured at all.But I don’t like the concept of releasing calls because when a president or prime minister, or a king or a queen, calls the United States, you don’t like to say, “Gee, we’re going to release your call to the fake-news media, and they’re going to make you look like a fool.” What happens is, it’s hard to do business that way. You want to have people feel comfortable.So I hated it, but you folks were saying such lies, such horrible things about a call that was so innocent and so nice. In fact, Lindsey Graham said to me, when he read it — it was very interesting. He’s a good man. He’s a smart man. He said, “I can’t believe it. I never knew you could be this, really, nice to a person.” He said, “I cannot believe it. You were so nice. I didn’t think you had that in you to be so nice.”I was nice. I’m nice to a lot of people. People don’t understand that. But I was. But he was shocked that it was such a nice call. There — he said, “There is nothing here.” And all fair people say the same thing.But I don’t like the precedent, Steve. I don’t like it where you’re dealing with heads of state and to think that their call is going to be released. But I felt that — and, you know, we spoke to Ukraine about it. Mike actually called up his counterpart, and we spoke to Ukraine about it because we want to — because they could have been — if that they didn’t want us to do it, we would not have done it.But he actually said, “That was a very innocent call. You can release it all you want.”Q And are you now braced for long impeachment saga?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Well, I thought we won. I thought it was dead. It was dead. The Mueller report — no obstruction, no collusion. You look at all of the things that happened.Corey Lewandowski was fantastic the other day, as a person that they have been tormenting. You look at all the people that they’ve tormented, all the legal fees. People came here with bright eyes; they wanted to make life so great for other people. And they left where they spent hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal fees that they didn’t have. And it’s a sad thing. What these Democrats have done to ruin lives is so sad.I’ve seen people with only good intention. They came to Washington because they wanted to make the United States and the world a better place. And they went home — they were dark. They got hit by Mueller’s subpoenas. I think there were 2,500 subpoenas, or some ridiculous number. Five hundred people were interviewed, and yet, they don’t interview Joe Biden and his son.If you’re Democrat, you have automatic protection. That’s years and years of people putting in certain people into positions. But when you look at all of the — all of the trauma that these fakers, of course — and the press — look, the press is — much of the press is not only fake, it’s corrupt. These stories they write are corrupt; they’re so wrong. And they know that.You know, it used to be — I used to get great press until I ran for politics. I mean, I used to be the king of getting good press. I was very good at it. And I got good. I mean, they covered me well for what — otherwise, I probably wouldn’t be here.And once I ran, I said, “Boy, this is incredible.” But if you see the way they treat my family — used to be treated great. My family worked so hard. The people that work with me — these people — all of these people, they work so hard. They’ve done such a good —Look, we have the greatest economy we’ve ever had. We have a military — two and a half trillion dollars. We’ve rebuilt our military. You don’t hear the vets complaining. We got Choice approved. It couldn’t be approved.But when you see what happened with the viciousness, and when you see little Adam Schiff go out and lie and lie and stand at the mic — smart guy, by the way — stand at the mic and act like he’s so serious. And then he goes into a room with Nadler, and they must laugh their asses off. They must laugh their asses off.But it’s so bad for our country. People have said — Rush Limbaugh — great man; Sean Hannity said it. A lot of people have said it. Mark Levin. They said they don’t know if one man anywhere in the world, with all the men they know — or woman — that could handle what I’ve had to handle.And I think that’s true, but I handle it. To me, it’s like putting on a suit.All right, how about one more question? A question on the economy. A question on the economy.Go ahead. Go ahead.Q Hi, Mr. President. VPItv from Venezuela — Caracas, Venezuela.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Good. Good. Wow.Q Yeah.PRESIDENT TRUMP: How are you doing?Q We made it.PRESIDENT TRUMP: How are you doing over there?Q Pretty bad. Our situation is pretty bad.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Yeah. I would say “pretty bad.” Yeah. Sad.Q Yeah. But we are fighting.PRESIDENT TRUMP: And it was one of the great countries and one of the richest countries not so long ago — 15 years ago. It’s incredible.Q But we are going to make it.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Right. I agree with that. And we’re helping you.Q Yeah.PRESIDENT TRUMP: We’re helping you.Q Yeah, I know. And thank you.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Go ahead.Q I have two questions —PRESIDENT TRUMP: Go ahead.Q — to take advantage of this. Maduro traveled to Russia and Diosdado Cabello to North Korea — two of the most antagonist nations in the U.S. interests. What can be done to contain this? What are they looking for in that country? And because the special envoy, Mr. Abrams, said that the Russians are willing to negotiate it. This is one question.And the other: Mr. President, you say that the socialists is one of the biggest challenges, you said yesterday in the United Nations. But the region is far from safe. Maduro is still a dictator, full in power. (Inaudible) in Argentina and Brazil are on their (inaudible) about the socialist and populist. Are you worried about it?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Well, I just say that socialism will never happen in the United States. It can’t happen in the United States. And Venezuela — unfortunately, I have to use your country as the example of what socialism can do, how it can tear the fabric of a country apart. Because I know a lot about Venezuela.I’ve had many, many friends of mine come from Venezuela. They live — many in Miami — a certain section of Miami, I won’t mention the name because they’ll say I’m thinking about my business, and I’m not. But they are fantastic people and they like your President. They voted overwhelmingly for me. They like what I’m doing for Venezuela.We have Venezuela very much in our hearts and very much in our sights. And we’re watching it very carefully. And you know what I would say? We’re giving millions and millions of dollars in aid — not that we want to, from the Maduro standpoint, but we have to because, on a humanitarian — people are dying. They have no food. They have no water. They have no nothing. They’re dying. No medicine. Their hospitals are closed or — or don’t even have electricity. It’s so sad to see.Let me just say that we have it under control. We are watching it very carefully. And we’re going to be very, very —Q Russia (inaudible) —PRESIDENT TRUMP: We’re — we’re watching it very carefully, including other countries that may or may not be playing games. We’re watching it very closely.Q But, you know, if Russia is talking with the USA or Guaidó, what can you tell — about us?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Just put this in the back of your mind: It’s all going to be fine. We know everything that you said, and it’s all going to be fine. We’re very much involved. We very much know what’s going on, and we’re very much involved. Okay?Thank you all very much. Thank you. Thank you very much. PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you very much. Mr. President, Mr. Secretary-General, distinguished delegates, ambassadors, and world leaders:Seven decades of history have passed through this hall, in all of their richness and drama. Where I stand, the world has heard from presidents and premiers at the height of the Cold War. We have seen the foundation of nations. We have seen the ringleaders of revolution. We have beheld saints who inspired us with hope, rebels who stirred us with passion, and heroes who emboldened us with courage — all here to share plans, proposals, visions, and ideas on the world’s biggest stage.Like those who met us before, our time is one of great contests, high stakes, and clear choices. The essential divide that runs all around the world and throughout history is once again thrown into stark relief. It is the divide between those whose thirst for control deludes them into thinking they are destined to rule over others and those people and nations who want only to rule themselves.I have the immense privilege of addressing you today as the elected leader of a nation that prizes liberty, independence, and self-government above all. The United States, after having spent over two and a half trillion dollars since my election to completely rebuild our great military, is also, by far, the world’s most powerful nation. Hopefully, it will never have to use this power.Americans know that in a world where others seek conquest and domination, our nation must be strong in wealth, in might, and in spirit. That is why the United States vigorously defends the traditions and customs that have made us who we are.Like my beloved country, each nation represented in this hall has a cherished history, culture, and heritage that is worth defending and celebrating, and which gives us our singular potential and strength.The free world must embrace its national foundations. It must not attempt to erase them or replace them.Looking around and all over this large, magnificent planet, the truth is plain to see: If you want freedom, take pride in your country. If you want democracy, hold on to your sovereignty. And if you want peace, love your nation. Wise leaders always put the good of their own people and their own country first.The future does not belong to globalists. The future belongs to patriots. The future belongs to sovereign and independent nations who protect their citizens, respect their neighbors, and honor the differences that make each country special and unique.It is why we in the United States have embarked on an exciting program of national renewal. In everything we do, we are focused on empowering the dreams and aspirations of our citizens.Thanks to our pro-growth economic policies, our domestic unemployment rate reached its lowest level in over half a century. Fueled by massive tax cuts and regulations cuts, jobs are being produced at a historic rate. Six million Americans have been added to the employment rolls in under three years.Last month, African American, Hispanic American, and Asian American unemployment reached their lowest rates ever recorded. We are marshaling our nation’s vast energy abundance, and the United States is now the number one producer of oil and natural gas anywhere in the world. Wages are rising, incomes are soaring, and 2.5 million Americans have been lifted out of poverty in less than three years.As we rebuild the unrivaled might of the American military, we are also revitalizing our alliances by making it very clear that all of our partners are expected to pay their fair share of the tremendous defense burden, which the United States has borne in the past.At the center of our vision for national renewal is an ambitious campaign to reform international trade. For decades, the international trading system has been easily exploited by nations acting in very bad faith. As jobs were outsourced, a small handful grew wealthy at the expense of the middle class.In America, the result was 4.2 million lost manufacturing jobs and $15 trillion in trade deficits over the last quarter century. The United States is now taking that decisive action to end this grave economic injustice. Our goal is simple: We want balanced trade that is both fair and reciprocal.We have worked closely with our partners in Mexico and Canada to replace NAFTA with the brand new and hopefully bipartisan U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement.Tomorrow, I will join Prime Minister Abe of Japan to continue our progress in finalizing a terrific new trade deal.As the United Kingdom makes preparations to exit the European Union, I have made clear that we stand ready to complete an exceptional new trade agreement with the UK that will bring tremendous benefits to both of our countries. We are working closely with Prime Minister Boris Johnson on a magnificent new trade deal.The most important difference in America’s new approach on trade concerns our relationship with China. In 2001, China was admitted to the World Trade Organization. Our leaders then argued that this decision would compel China to liberalize its economy and strengthen protections to provide things that were unacceptable to us, and for private property and for the rule of law. Two decades later, this theory has been tested and proven completely wrong.Not only has China declined to adopt promised reforms, it has embraced an economic model dependent on massive market barriers, heavy state subsidies, currency manipulation, product dumping, forced technology transfers, and the theft of intellectual property and also trade secrets on a grand scale.As just one example, I recently met the CEO of a terrific American company, Micron Technology, at the White House. Micron produces memory chips used in countless electronics. To advance the Chinese government’s five-year economic plan, a company owned by the Chinese stateallegedlystole Micron’s designs, valued at up to $8.7 billion. Soon, the Chinese company obtainspatents for nearly an identical product, and Micron was banned from selling its own goodsin China. But we are seeking justice.The United States lost 60,000 factories after China entered the WTO. This is happening to other countries all over the globe.The World Trade Organization needs drastic change. The second-largest economy in the world should not be permitted to declare itself a “developing country” in order to game the system at others’ expense.For years, these abuses were tolerated, ignored, or even encouraged. Globalism exerted a religious pull over past leaders, causing them to ignore their own national interests.But as far as America is concerned, those days are over. To confront these unfair practices, I placed massive tariffs on more than $500 billion worth of Chinese-made goods. Already, as a result of these tariffs, supply chains are relocating back to America and to other nations, and billions of dollars are being paid to our Treasury.The American people are absolutely committed to restoring balance to our relationship with China. Hopefully, we can reach an agreement that would be beneficial for both countries. But as I have made very clear, I will not accept a bad deal for the American people.As we endeavor to stabilize our relationship, we’re also carefully monitoring the situation in Hong Kong. The world fully expects that the Chinese government will honor its binding treaty, made with the British and registered with the United Nations, in which China commits to protect Hong Kong’s freedom, legal system, and democratic ways of life. How China chooses to handle the situation will say a great deal about its role in the world in the future. We are all counting on President Xi as a great leader.The United States does not seek conflict with any other nation. We desire peace, cooperation, and mutual gain with all. But I will never fail to defend America’s interests.One of the greatest security threats facing peace-loving nations today is the repressive regime in Iran. The regime’s record of death and destruction is well known to us all. Not only is Iran the world’s number one state sponsor of terrorism, but Iran’s leaders are fueling the tragic wars in both Syria and Yemen.At the same time, the regime is squandering the nation’s wealth and future in a fanatical quest for nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them. We must never allow this to happen.To stop Iran’s path to nuclear weapons and missiles, I withdrew the United States from the terrible Iran nuclear deal, which has very little time remaining, did not allow inspection of important sites, and did not cover ballistic missiles.Following our withdrawal, we have implemented severe economic sanctions on the country. Hoping to free itself from sanctions, the regime has escalated its violent and unprovoked aggression. In response to Iran’s recent attack on Saudi Arabian oil facilities, we just imposed the highest level of sanctions on Iran’s central bank and sovereign wealth fund.All nations have a duty to act. No responsible government should subsidize Iran’s bloodlust. As long as Iran’s menacing behavior continues, sanctions will not be lifted; they will be tightened. Iran’s leaders will have turned a proud nation into just another cautionary tale of what happens when a ruling class abandons its people and embarks on a crusade for personal power and riches.For 40 years, the world has listened to Iran’s rulers as they lash out at everyone else for the problems they alone have created. They conduct ritual chants of “Death to America” and traffic in monstrous anti-Semitism. Last year the country’s Supreme Leader stated, “Israel is a malignant cancerous tumor…that has to be removed and eradicated: it is possible and it will happen.” America will never tolerate such anti-Semitic hate.Fanatics have long used hatred of Israel to distract from their own failures. Thankfully, there is a growing recognition in the wider Middle East that the countries of the region share common interests in battling extremism and unleashing economic opportunity. That is why it is so important to have full, normalized relations between Israel and its neighbors. Only a relationship built on common interests, mutual respect, and religious tolerance can forge a better future.Iran’s citizens deserve a government that cares about reducing poverty, ending corruption, and increasing jobs — not stealing their money to fund a massacre abroad and at home.After four decades of failure, it is time for Iran’s leaders to step forward and to stop threatening other countries, and focus on building up their own country. It is time for Iran’s leaders to finally put the Iranian people first.America is ready to embrace friendship with all who genuinely seek peace and respect.Many of America’s closest friends today were once our gravest foes. The United States has never believed in permanent enemies. We want partners, not adversaries. America knows that while anyone can make war, only the most courageous can choose peace.For this same reason, we have pursued bold diplomacy on the Korean Peninsula. I have told Kim Jong Un what I truly believe: that, like Iran, his country is full of tremendous untapped potential, but that to realize that promise, North Korea must denuclearize.Around the world, our message is clear: America’s goal is lasting, America’s goal is harmony, and America’s goal is not to go with these endless wars — wars that never end.With that goal in mind, my administration is also pursuing the hope of a brighter future in Afghanistan. Unfortunately, the Taliban has chosen to continue their savage attacks. And we will continue to work with our coalition of Afghan partners to stamp out terrorism, and we will never stop working to make peace a reality.Here in the Western Hemisphere, we are joining with our partners to ensure stability and opportunity all across the region. In that mission, one of our most critical challenges is illegal immigration, which undermines prosperity, rips apart societies, and empowers ruthless criminal cartels.Mass illegal migration is unfair, unsafe, and unsustainable for everyone involved: the sending countries and the depleted countries. And they become depleted very fast, but their youth is not taken care of and human capital goes to waste.The receiving countries are overburdened with more migrants than they can responsibly accept. And the migrants themselves are exploited, assaulted, and abused by vicious coyotes. Nearly one third of women who make the journey north to our border are sexually assaulted along the way. Yet, here in the United States and around the world, there is a growing cottage industry of radical activists and non-governmental organizations that promote human smuggling. These groups encourage illegal migration and demand erasure of national borders.Today, I have a message for those open border activists who cloak themselves in the rhetoric of social justice: Your policies are not just. Your policies are cruel and evil. You are empowering criminal organizations that prey on innocent men, women, and children. You put your own false sense of virtue before the lives, wellbeing,and[of] countless innocent people. When you undermine border security, you are undermining human rights and human dignity.Many of the countries here today are coping with the challenges of uncontrolled migration. Each of you has the absolute right to protect your borders, and so, of course, does our country. Today, we must resolve to work together to end human smuggling, end human trafficking, and put these criminal networks out of business for good.To our country, I can tell you sincerely: We are working closely with our friends in the region — including Mexico, Canada, Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and Panama — to uphold the integrity of borders and ensure safety and prosperity for our people. I would like to thank President López Obrador of Mexico for the great cooperation we are receiving and for right now putting 27,000 troops on our southern border. Mexico is showing us great respect, and I respect them in return.The U.S., we have taken very unprecedented action to stop the flow of illegal immigration. To anyone considering crossings of our border illegally, please hear these words: Do not pay the smugglers. Do not pay the coyotes. Do not put yourself in danger. Do not put your children in danger. Because if you make it here, you will not be allowed in; you will be promptly returned home. You will not be released into our country. As long as I am President of the United States, we will enforce our laws and protect our borders.For all of the countries of the Western Hemisphere, our goal is to help people invest in the bright futures of their own nation. Our region is full of such incredible promise: dreams waiting to be built and national destinies for all. And they are waiting also to be pursued.Throughout the hemisphere, there are millions of hardworking, patriotic young people eager to build, innovate, and achieve. But these nations cannot reach their potential if a generation of youth abandon their homes in search of a life elsewhere. We want every nation in our region to flourish and its people to thrive in freedom and peace.In that mission, we are also committed to supporting those people in the Western Hemisphere who live under brutal oppression, such as those in Cuba, Nicaragua, and Venezuela.According to a recent report from the U.N. Human Rights Council, women in Venezuela stand in line for 10 hours a day waiting for food. Over 15,000 people have been detained as political prisoners. Modern-day death squads are carrying out thousands of extrajudicial killings.The dictator Maduro is a Cuban puppet, protected by Cuban bodyguards, hiding from his own people while Cuba plunders Venezuela’s oil wealth to sustain its own corrupt communist rule.Since I last spoke in this hall, the United States and our partners have built a historic coalition of 55 countries that recognize the legitimate government of Venezuela.To the Venezuelans trapped in this nightmare: Please know that all of America is united behind you. The United States has vast quantities of humanitarian aid ready and waiting to be delivered. We are watching the Venezuela situation very closely. We await the day when democracy will be restored, when Venezuela will be free, and when liberty will prevail throughout this hemisphere.One of the most serious challenges our countries face is the specter of socialism. It’s the wrecker of nations and destroyer of societies.Events in Venezuela remind us all that socialism and communism are not about justice, they are not about equality, they are not about lifting up the poor, and they are certainly not about the good of the nation. Socialism and communism are about one thing only: power for the ruling class.Today, I repeat a message for the world that I have delivered at home: America will never be a socialist country.In the last century, socialism and communism killed 100 million people. Sadly, as we see in Venezuela, the death toll continues in this country. These totalitarian ideologies, combined with modern technology, have the power toexcise[exercise] new and disturbing forms of suppression and domination.For this reason, the United States is taking steps to better screen foreign technology and investments and to protect our data and our security. We urge every nation present to do the same.Freedom and democracy must be constantly guarded and protected, both abroad and from within. We must always be skeptical of those who want conformity and control. Even in free nations, we see alarming signs and new challenges to liberty.A small number of social media platforms are acquiring immense power over what we can see and over what we are allowed to say. A permanent political class is openly disdainful, dismissive, and defiant of the will of the people. A faceless bureaucracy operates in secret and weakens democratic rule. Media and academic institutions push flat-out assaults on our histories, traditions, and values.In the United States, my administration has made clear to social media companies that we will uphold the right of free speech. A free society cannot allow social media giants to silence the voices of the people, and a free people must never, ever be enlisted in the cause of silencing, coercing, canceling, or blacklisting their own neighbors.As we defend American values, we affirm the right of all people to live in dignity. For this reason, my administration is working with other nations to stop criminalizing of homosexuality, and we stand in solidarity with LGBTQ people who live in countries that punish, jail, or execute individuals based upon sexual orientation.We are also championing the role of women in our societies. Nations that empower women are much wealthier, safer, and much more politically stable. It is therefore vital not only to a nation’s prosperity, but also is vital to its national security, to pursue women’s economic development.Guided by these principles, my administration launched the Women’s Global Development and Prosperity Initiatives. The W-GDP is first-ever government-wide approach to women’s economic empowerment, working to ensure that women all over the planet have the legal right to own and inherit property, work in the same industries as men, travel freely, and access credit and institutions.Yesterday, I was also pleased to host leaders for a discussion about an ironclad American commitment: protecting religious leaders and also protecting religious freedom. This fundamental right is under growing threat around the world. Hard to believe, but 80 percent of the world’s population lives in countries where religious liberty is in significant danger or even completely outlawed. Americans will neverfire ortire in our effort to defend and promote freedom of worship and religion. We want and support religious liberty for all.Americans will also never tire of defending innocent life. We are aware that many United Nations projects have attempted to assert a global right to taxpayer-funded abortion on demand, right up until the moment of delivery. Global bureaucrats have absolutely no business attacking the sovereignty of nations that wish to protect innocent life. Like many nations here today, we in America believe that every child — born and unborn — is a sacred gift from God.There is no circumstance under which the United States will allow internationalentries[entities] to trample on the rights of our citizens, including the right to self-defense. That is why, this year, I announced that we will never ratify the U.N. Arms Trade Treaty, which would threaten the liberties of law-abiding American citizens. The United States will always uphold our constitutional right to keep and bear arms. We will always uphold our Second Amendment.The core rights and values America defends today were inscribed in America’s founding documents. Our nation’s Founders understood that there will always be those who believe they are entitled to wield power and control over others. Tyranny advances under many names and many theories, but it always comes down to the desire for domination. It protects not the interests of many, but the privilege of few.Our Founders gave us a system designed to restrain this dangerous impulse. They chose to entrust American power to those most invested in the fate of our nation: a proud and fiercely independent people.The true good of a nation can only be pursued by those who love it: by citizens who are rooted in its history, who are nourished by its culture, committed to its values, attached to its people, and who know that its future is theirs to build or theirs to lose. Patriots see a nation and its destiny in ways no one else can.Liberty is only preserved, sovereignty is only secured, democracy is only sustained, greatness is only realized, by the will and devotion of patriots. In their spirit is found the strength to resist oppression, the inspiration to forge legacy, the goodwill to seek friendship, and the bravery to reach for peace. Love of our nations makes the world better for all nations.So to all the leaders here today, join us in the most fulfilling mission a person could have, the most profound contribution anyone can make: Lift up your nations. Cherish your culture. Honor your histories. Treasure your citizens. Make your countries strong, and prosperous, and righteous. Honor the dignity of your people, and nothing will be outside of your reach.When our nations are greater, the future will be brighter, our people will be happier, and our partnerships will be stronger.With God’s help, together we will cast off the enemies of liberty and overcome the oppressors of dignity. We will set new standards of living and reach new heights of human achievement. We will rediscover old truths, unravel old mysteries, and make thrilling new breakthroughs. And we will find more beautiful friendship and more harmony among nations than ever before.My fellow leaders, the path to peace and progress, and freedom and justice, and a better world for all humanity, begins at home.Thank you. God bless you. God bless the nations of the world. And God bless America. Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much, everybody. Before we begin, I’d like to just say that we have a large team of very talented people in China. We’ve had a negotiation going on for about two days. It’s going extremely well. Who knows what that means, because it only matters if we get it done. But we’re very much working very closely with China and President Xi, who I respect a lot. Very good relationship that we have. And we’re a lot closer than we ever were in this country with having a real trade deal.We’re covering everything — all of the points that people have been talking about for years that said couldn’t be done, whether it was theft or anything. Anything. The unfairness. We’ve been losing, on average, $375 billion a year with China. A lot of people think it’s $506 billion. Some people think it’s much more than that. We’re going to be leveling the playing field.The tariffs are hurting China very badly. They don’t want them. And frankly, if we can make the deal, it’d be my honor to remove them. But otherwise, we’re having many billions of dollars pouring into our Treasury. We’ve never had that before with China. It’s been very much of a one-way street.So, that’s happening. And the relationship with China is very good, but I think they finally respect our country. They haven’t respected us for a long time. Not for a long time.The UK and the U.S., as you probably have been seeing and hearing, we’re agreeing to go forward and preserve our trade agreement. You know all of the situation with respect to Brexit, and the complexity and the problems. But we have a very good trading relationship with the UK, and that’s just been strengthened further.So with the UK, we’re continuing our trade, and we are going to actually be increasing it very substantially as time goes by. We expect that the UK will be very, very substantially increased as it relates to trade with the United States. The relationship there, also, is very good.We have a lot of great announcements having to do with Syria and our success with the eradication of the caliphate. And that will be announced over the next 24 hours. And many other things. A lot of positive things are going on.We’re working on a summit. And you know all about the summit. It will be in Vietnam — Hanoi. And we will — we’ll be meeting in Hanoi. We’ll be meeting in Hanoi. I think a lot of you will be going, I suspect. And I hope we have the same good luck as we had in the first summit. A lot was done in the first summit. No more rockets going up. No more missiles going up. No more testing of nuclear. Get back our remains, the remains of our great heroes from the Korean War. And we got back our hostages.But we hope we’re going to be very much equally as successful. I’m in no rush for speed. We just don’t want testing. The sanctions, as you know, remain. Everything is remaining. China has been helping us, and Russia has been helping us. And South Korea, I think you can say, has been — we’ve been working very closely with South Korea, with Japan.But China, Russia, on the border, have really been at least partially living up to what they’re supposed to be doing. And that’s okay — as per the United Nations.So we will have a meeting on the 27th and 28th of February, and I think that will be a very successful one. I look forward to seeing Chairman Kim. We have also established a very good relationship, which has never happened between him or his family and the United States. They have really taken advantage of the United States. Billions of dollars has been paid to them. And we won’t let that happen.But we think that North Korea and Chairman Kim have a tremendous potential as an economic force, economic power. Their location between South Korea and then Russia and China — right smack in the middle — is phenomenal.And we think that they have a great chance for tremendous economic prosperity in the future. So I look forward to seeing Chairman Kim in Vietnam.Today, I’m announcing several critical actions that my administration has taken to confront a problem that we have right here at home. We fight wars that are 6,000 miles away; wars that we should have never been in, in many cases. But we don’t control our own border.So we’re going to confront the national security crisis on our southern border. And we’re going to do it one way or the other — we have to do it — not because it was a campaign promise, which it is. It was one of many, by the way; not my only one. We’re rebuilding the military, our economy is thriving like never before.You look at other economies — they’re doing terribly, and we’re doing phenomenally. The market is up tremendously today, not that that’s anything, but, you know — because I’ll go back in and they’ll say, “Oh, the market just went down.” But the market is getting close to the new highs that we created. We have all the records. We have every record. But we’re getting close to that point again where we’ll create new records.So our country is doing very well, economically. And we’ve done a lot. But one of the things I said I have to do and I want to do is border security, because we have tremendous amounts of drugs flowing into our country, much of it coming from the southern border. When you look and when you listen to politicians — in particular, certain Democrats — they say it all comes through the port of entry. It’s wrong. It’s wrong. It’s just a lie. It’s all a lie.They say walls don’t work. Walls work 100 percent. Whether it’s El Paso — I really was smiling, because the other night I was in El Paso — we had a tremendous crowd, and — tremendous crowd. And I asked the people — many of whom were from El Paso, but they came from all over Texas. And I asked them. I said, “Let me ask you, as a crowd: When the wall went up, was it better?” You were there, some of you. It was not only better; it was like 100 percent better. You know what they did.But that’s only one example. There are so many examples. In El Paso, they have close to 2,000 murders right on the other side of the wall. And they had 23 murders. It’s a lot of murders, but it’s not close to 2,000 murders right on the other side of the wall, in Mexico.So everyone knows that walls work. And there are better examples than El Paso, frankly. You just take a look. Almost everywhere. Take a look at Israel. They’re building another wall. Their wall is 99.9 percent effective, they told me — 99.9 percent. That’s what it would be with us, too.The only weakness is they go to a wall and then they go around the wall. They go around the wall and in. Okay? That’s what it is. It’s very simple. And a big majority of the big drugs — the big drug loads — don’t go through ports of entry. They can’t go through ports of entry. You can’t take big loads because you have people — we have some very capable people; the Border Patrol, law enforcement — looking.You can’t take human traffic — women and girls — you can’t take them through ports of entry. You can’t have them tied up in the backseat of a car or a truck or a van. They open the door. They look. They can’t see three women with tape on their mouth or three women whose hands are tied.They go through areas where you have no wall. Everybody knows that. Nancy knows it. Chuck knows it. They all know it. It’s all a big lie. It’s a big con game.You don’t have to be very smart to know: You put up a barrier, the people come in, and that’s it. They can’t do anything unless they walk left or right, and they find an area where there’s no barrier, and they come into the United States. Welcome.We’ve detained more people. Our border agents are doing such incredible work. Our military has been incredible. We put up barbed wire on top of certain old walls that were there. We fixed the wall and we loaded it up with barbed wire. It’s very successful.But our military has been fantastic, and I want to thank them. And it’s very necessary. We’ve broken up two caravans that are on their way. They just are breaking. They’re in the process of breaking up. We have another one that we haven’t been able to break up yet.We’ve been actually working with Mexico much better than ever before. I want to thank the President. I want to thank Mexico. They have their own problems. They have the largest number of murders that they’ve ever had in their history — almost 40,000 murders. Forty thousand. And they got to straighten that out, and I think they will.But I just want to thank the President, because he’s been helping us with these monstrous caravans that have been coming up. We had one that it was up to over 15,000 people. It’s largely broken up. Others have gotten through. And, in Tijuana, you have a lot of people staying there. If we didn’t have the wall up, and if we didn’t have the wall secured and strengthened, they would have walked right through; they’d be welcomed to the United States.One of the things we’d save tremendous — just a tremendous amount on would be sending the military. If we had a wall, we don’t need the military because we’d have a wall.So I’m going to be signing a national emergency. And it’s been signed many times before. It’s been signed by other Presidents from 1977 or so. It gave the Presidents the power.There’s rarely been a problem. They sign it; nobody cares. I guess they weren’t very exciting. But nobody cares. They sign it for far less important things, in some cases, in many cases. We’re talking about an invasion of our country with drugs, with human traffickers, with all types of criminals and gangs.We have some of the greatest people I know. They’ve been with me from the beginning of my campaign — almost from the first week. The Angel Moms. Unfortunately, we have new Angel Moms. One incredible woman just showed me her daughter who — we’re talking about killed, in the year of ’18. I said, “I haven’t seen you before.” She said, “No, I’m new.” I said, “That’s too bad.” It’s too bad. It’s so sad.Stand up, just for a second. Show how beautiful your girl was. Thank you.I have such respect for these people. Angel Moms, Angel Dads, Angel Families. I have great respect for these people. These are great people. These are great people. They’re fighting for their children that have been killed by people that were illegally in this country.And the press doesn’t cover them; they don’t want to, incredibly. And they’re not treated the way they should be. They’re fighting for other people because they don’t want what happened to their children or husband or anybody.We have one young lady whose husband — please, stand up. Your husband was just killed in Maryland. Incredible man. Just killed. Beautiful children — won’t be seeing their father again.These are brave people. These are people that — they don’t have to be here. They don’t have to be doing this. They’re doing it for other people. So I just want to thank all of you for being here, okay? I really do. I want to thank you. Incredible people.Last year, 70,000 Americans were killed, at least — I think the number is ridiculously low — by drugs, including meth and heroin and cocaine, fentanyl. And one of the things that I did with President Xi in China, when I met him in Argentina at a summit — before I even started talking about the trade — it was a trade meeting. It went very well, but before I talked about trade, I talked about something more important.I said, “Listen, we have tremendous amounts of fentanyl coming into our country. It kills tens of thousands of people — I think far more than anybody registers. And I’d love you to declare it a lethal drug and put it on your criminal list.” And their criminal list is much tougher than our criminal list. Their criminal list — a drug dealer gets a thing called the death penalty. Our criminal list, a drug dealer gets a thing called, “How about a fine?”And when I asked President Xi, I said, “Do you have a drug problem?” “No, no, no.” I said, “You have 1.4 billion people. What do you mean you have no drug problem?” “No, we don’t have a drug problem.” I said, “Why?” “Death penalty. We give death penalty to people that sell drugs.” End of problem.What do we do? We set up blue ribbon committees. Lovely men and women — they sit around a table, they have lunch, they eat, they dine, and they waste a lot of time. So if we want to get smart, we can get smart. You can end the drug problem. You can end it a lot faster than you think.But President Xi has agreed to put fentanyl on his list of deadly, deadly drugs. And it’s a criminal penalty. And the penalty is death. So that’s, frankly, one of the things I’m most excited about in our trade deal, if you want to know the truth. I think maybe there’s no more important point.We’re going to make billions of dollars with this trade deal. It’s going to be great for our country and great for China, I hope. Their market is down close to 40 percent. Our market is way up. We’ve picked up, since my election, trillions of dollars of worth. Trillions. Many trillions. And China has lost trillions of dollars. But I want it to be good for China and I want it to be good for the United States. So we’ll see what happens.China is coming here next week, by the way. They’re coming home, the traders. And then China is coming here next week. And then I’ll be meeting with President Xi at some point after that to maybe — for some remaining deals. We’ll make them directly, one-on-one, ourselves.So, we’re going to be signing today, and registering, national emergency. And it’s a great thing to do because we have an invasion of drugs, invasion of gangs, invasion of people, and it’s unacceptable.And by signing the national emergency — something signed many times by other Presidents — many, many times. President Obama — in fact, we may be using one of the national emergencies that he signed, having to do with cartels. Criminal cartels. It’s a very good emergency that he signed. And we’re going to use parts of it in our dealings on cartels. So that would be a second national emergency. But, in that case, it’s already in place.And what we want — really want to do — is simple. It’s not like it’s complicated. It’s very simple: We want to stop drugs from coming into our country. We want to stop criminals and gangs from coming into our country. Nobody has done the job that we’ve ever done. I mean, nobody has done the job that we’ve done on the border.And in a way, what I did by creating such a great economy — and if the opposing party got in, this economy would be down the tubes. You know, I hear a lot of people say, “Oh, well. But maybe the previous administration…” Let me tell you, the previous administration, it was heading south, and it was going fast. We would have been down the tubes. The regulations were strangling our country. Unnecessary regulations.By creating such a strong economy — you just look at your televisions or see what’s going on today; it’s through the roof. What happens is more people want to come, so we have far more people trying to get into our country today than probably we’ve ever had before. And we’ve done an incredible job in stopping them, but it’s a massive number of people.If we had the wall, it would be very easy. We would make up for the cost of the wall just in the cost of the fact that I would be able to have fewer people. We wouldn’t need all of this incredible talent, some of whom are sitting in the first row. You wouldn’t need all of this incredible talent. We would get — we would get thousands of law enforcement people, including Border Patrol. You put them in different areas, you have them doing different things. Law enforcement and Border Patrol.And I want to thank law enforcement, and I want to thank Border Patrol, and I want to thank ICE. ICE is abused by the press and by the Democrats. And, by the way, we’re going to be taking care of ICE. You know, we talk about the new bill. We’re going to be taking care of ICE. They wanted to get rid of ICE. And the bill is just the opposite of that. A lot of good things happened.So, that’s the story. We want to have a safe country. I ran on a very simple slogan: “Make America Great Again.” If you’re going to have drugs pouring across the border, if you’re going to have human traffickers pouring across the border in areas where we have no protection, in areas where we don’t have a barrier, then very hard to make America great again.But we’ve done a fantastic job, but we haven’t been given the equipment. We haven’t been given the walls. And in the bill, by the way, they didn’t even fight us on most of the stuff. Ports of entry. We have so much money, we don’t know what to do with it. I don’t know what to do with all the money they’re giving us. It’s crazy.The only place they don’t want to give as much money — $1,375,000,000. Sounds like a lot, but it’s not so much, although we’re putting it to much better use than it used to be. A lot of the past administrations, they had — it was easy to get, and they didn’t build or they didn’t do what they could have done. It would have been great. It would have been great to have done it earlier, but I was a little new to the job, a little new to the profession.And we had a little disappointment for the first year and a half. People that should have stepped up did not step up. They didn’t step up, and they should have. Would have been easy. Not that easy, but it would have been a lot easier. But some people didn’t step up. But we’re stepping up now.So we have a chance of getting close to $8 billion. Whether it’s $8 billion or $2 billion or $1.5 billion, it’s going to build a lot of wall. We’re getting it done. We’re right now in construction with wall in some of the most important areas. And we have renovated a tremendous amount of wall, making it just as good as new. That’s where a lot of the money has been spent — on renovation. In fact, we were restricted to renovating, which is okay. But we’re going to run out of areas that we can renovate pretty soon. So — and we need new wall.So I want to thank everybody for being here. I want to thank, in particular, the Angel Moms and Dads for being here. Thank you very much. We have great respect for you. The real country, our real country — the people that really love our country, they love you. So I just want you to know that. I know how hard you fight and I know how hard a fight you’re having.I also want to thank all of the law enforcement for the job you do. Believe me, our country loves you and they respect you greatly. And we’re giving you a lot of surplus. We’re giving you surplus military equipment, which a lot of people didn’t like giving, previous to this administration. But hundreds of millions of dollars of surplus equipment. And as we get it, as you know, we send it down. And you have much better protection. But I really appreciate you being here.So the order is signed. And I’ll sign the final papers as soon as I get into the Oval Office. And we will have a national emergency, and then we will then be sued, and they will sue us in the Ninth Circuit, even though it shouldn’t be there. And we will possibly get a bad ruling, and then we’ll get another bad ruling. And then we’ll end up in the Supreme Court, and hopefully we’ll get a fair shake. And we’ll win in the Supreme Court, just like the ban. They sued us in the Ninth Circuit, and we lost, and then we lost in the appellate division, and then we went to the Supreme Court, and we won.And it was very interesting, because yesterday they were talking about the ban. Because we have a ban. It’s very helpful. Madam Secretary, is that right? Without the ban, we’d have a bigger problem. We have a ban on certain areas, certain countries, depending on what’s going on in the world. And we won.But somebody said, “President Trump lost on the ban.” Well, he was right; I lost at the lower court. He — he didn’t say that we ultimately won at the United States Supreme Court. They didn’t want to say that. They didn’t want to go that far. They were saying how I lost. The person sitting right up here — “Donald Trump lost on the ban.” Yeah, I did. And then I lost a second time; you should have said that, too. And then it went to the Supreme Court and I won. Didn’t want to take it that far. But we won on the ban and we won on other things, too.The probably easiest one to win is on declaring a national emergency, because we’re declaring it for virtual invasion purposes: drugs, traffickers, and gangs. And one of the things, just to finish: We have removed thousands of MS-13 gang monsters. Thousands. They’re out of this country. We take them out by the thousands. And they are monsters.Okay. Do you have any questions? Yeah. John, go ahead.Q Mr. President — (inaudible).AIDE: Yes, we do. There you go.Q You were prepared. Mr. President, a lot of the money —THE PRESIDENT: Were you saying I was prepared?Q With the microphone and prepared for questions.THE PRESIDENT: Oh, I thought you meant I was prepared. I couldn’t believe you said that.Q (Laughs.) No, no, no. (Laughter.)THE PRESIDENT: People don’t like saying that.Q You were prepared for questions.THE PRESIDENT: I am prepared. I’m always prepared.Q A lot of the money that goes to count toward your $8 billion is money that’s being reprogrammed in the DOD budget. How can you guarantee to military families and to our men and women of the military that none of the money that would be reprogrammed to a wall will take away from other technology, other renovations, construction that is desperately needed in our military?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. So, John, we had certain funds that are being used at the discretion of generals, at the discretion of the military. Some of them haven’t been allocated yet, and some of the generals think that this is more important. I was speaking to a couple of them. They think this is far more important than what they were going to use it for. I said, “What were you going to use it for?” And I won’t go into details, but it didn’t sound too important to me.Plus, if you think, I’ve gotten $700 billion for the military in year one, and then last year, $716 billion. And we’re rebuilding our military, but we have a lot. And under the previous administration, our military was depleted — badly depleted. And they weren’t spending — I mean, they had a much less — they had a much smaller amount of money.So when I got $700 billion, and then $716 billion — and this year, it’s going to be pretty big too, because there’s few things more important than our military. You know, I’m a big deficit believer and all of that, but before we really start focusing on certain things, we have to build up our military. It was very badly depleted. And we’re buying all new jetfighters, all new missiles, all new defensive equipment. We have — we’ll soon have a military like we’ve never had before.But when you think about the kind of numbers you’re talking about — so you have $700 billion, $716 billion — when I need $2 billion, $3 billion of out that for a wall — which is a very important instrument, very important for the military because of the drugs that pour in. And as you know, we have specific rules and regulations where they have drugs, and what you can do in order to stop drugs. And that’s part of it, too.We’re taking a lot of money from that realm also. But when you have that kind of money going into the military, this is a very, very small amount that we’re asking for.Yeah, go ahead. Go ahead. ABC. Not NBC. I like ABC a little bit more — not much. Come on, ABC. Not much. Pretty close.Q Mr. President, what do you say to those, including some of your Republican allies, who say that you are violating the Constitution with this move and setting a bad precedent that will be abused by possibly Democratic Presidents in the future? Marco Rubio has made this point.THE PRESIDENT: Well, not too many people. Yeah. Not too many people have said that. But the courts will determine that.Look, I expect to be sued. I shouldn’t be sued. Very rarely do you get sued when you do national emergency. And then other people say, “Oh, if you use it for this, now what are we using it for?” We got to get rid of drugs and gangs and people. It’s an invasion. We have an invasion of drugs and criminals coming into our country that we stop, but it’s very hard to stop. With a wall, it would be very easy.So I think that we will be very successful in court. I think it’s clear. And the people that say we create precedent — well, what do you have? Fifty-six? There are a lot of times — well, that’s creating precedent. And many of those are far less important than having a border. If you don’t have a border, you don’t have a country.You know, we fight — before I got here — we fight all over the world to create borders for countries, but we don’t create a border for our own country.So I think what will happen is, sadly, we’ll be sued, and sadly, it’ll go through a process. And, happily, we’ll win — I think.Go ahead. Let’s go. Let’s hear it, NBC. Come on.Q Thank you, Mr. President. I just want to say, in the past, when President Obama tried to use executive action as it related to immigration, you said, “The whole concept of executive order, it’s not the way the country is supposed to be run.” You said, “You’re supposed to go through Congress and make a deal.” Will you concede that you were unable to make the deal that you had promised in the past, and that the deal you’re ending up with now from Congress is less than what you could have had before a 35-day shutdown?THE PRESIDENT: No. Look, I went through Congress. I made a deal. I got almost $1.4 billion when I wasn’t supposed to get one dollar — not one dollar. “He’s not going to get one dollar.” Well, I got $1.4 billion. But I’m not happy with it. I also got billions and billions of dollars for other things — port of entries, lots of different things. The purchase of drug equipment. More than we were even requesting.In fact, the primary fight was on the wall. Everything else, we have so much, as I said, I don’t know what to do with it we have so much money. But on the wall, they skimped.So I did — I was successful, in that sense, but I want to do it faster. I could do the wall over a longer period of time. I didn’t need to do this. But I’d rather do it much faster. And I don’t have to do it for the election. I’ve already done a lot of wall, for the election — 2020. And the only reason we’re up here talking about this is because of the election, because they want to try and win an election, which it looks like they’re not going to be able to do. And this is one of the ways they think they can possibly win, is by obstruction and a lot of other nonsense.And I think that I just want to get it done faster, that’s all.Okay. Yes, ma’am, go ahead.Q Thank you, Mr. President.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you.Q Roberta Rampton from Reuters. I wanted to ask about China. Do you feel that enough progress has been made in the talks to head off the increase in tariffs scheduled for March 1?THE PRESIDENT: Well, you know, you’re talking to the wrong person, because I happen to like tariffs, okay? I mean, we’re taking in billions and billions of dollars in tariffs from China. And our steel industry now, as an example, we tax dumped steel — much of it comes from China — at 25 percent. Our steel industry is so vibrant now again, they’re building plants all over the United States. It’s a beautiful thing. And from a defensive standpoint, and from any standpoint, you need steel.You know, you can do without certain industries. Our country cannot do without steel.So, I love tariffs, but I also love them to negotiate. And right now, China is paying us billions of dollars a year in tariffs. And I haven’t even started.Now, here’s the thing: If we make a deal, they won’t have to pay. You know, it’ll be a whole different story. They won’t be paying that, but we’ll have a fair deal. There won’t be intellectual property theft. There won’t be so many other things that have gone on. And no other President has done this. No other — you know, we didn’t have a deal with China. You had the WTO, one of the worst trade deals ever made — probably even worse than NAFTA, if that’s believable, which, you know, hard to believe, because I think NAFTA was just a disaster. It was a total disaster for our country.And now we made the USMCA, which is going to be a terrific — a great deal. And, by the way, the USMCA, from Mexico — that’s United States, Mexico, Canada — that’s where the money is coming from, not directly but indirectly, for the wall. And nobody wants to talk about that. Because we’re saving billions and billions of dollars a year, if Congress approves that deal.Now, they might now want to approve a deal just because they’ll say — one of the things I’m thinking of doing — this has never been done before: No matter how good a deal I make with China, if they sell me Beijing for one dollar, if they give me 50 percent of their land and every ship that they’ve built over the last two years — which is a lot — and they give them to me free, the Democrats will say, “What a lousy deal; that’s a terrible deal.”Like, ZTE, I got a billion — more than a billion-dollar penalty in a short period of time. And the Democrats said, “Oh, should’ve gotten more.” When I made that deal, I said, “This is incredible.” I just got — I got over a billion-dollar penalty, plus they had to change their board of directors. They had to change their top management. But they had to pay over a billion dollars. I said, “What a deal.” It took like a week. And the Democrats didn’t even know there was a problem with ZTE.I’m the one that find them. I’m the one that settled it. Over a billion dollars. And President Xi called me and he said it would be important to him if they could get a deal. And we made a deal — paid — like, in a short period of time.The Democrats went out and said, “Oh, they should’ve done better.” So what I’m thinking of doing is getting Chuck Schumer, getting Nancy Pelosi, having them bring two or three of their brilliant representatives. And we’ll all go down together, and what we’ll do is we’ll negotiate. I’ll put them in the room and let them speak up. Because any deal I make with China, if it’s the great — it’s going to be better than any deal that anybody ever dreamt possible, or I’m not going to have a deal. It’s a very simple.But any deal I make with China, Schumer is going to stand up and say, “Oh, it should’ve been better. It should’ve been better.” And you know what? That’s not acceptable to me. So I’m thinking about doing something very different. I don’t think it’s ever been — I just don’t want to be second-guessed. But that’s not even second-guess; that’s called politics. Sadly, I’d probably do the same thing to them, okay?But any deal I make toward the end, I’m going to bring Schumer — at least offer him — and Pelosi. I’m going to say, “Please join me on the deal.”And, by the way, I just see our new Attorney General is sitting in the front row. Please stand up, Bill. (Applause.) Such an easy job he’s got. He’s got the easiest job in government. Thank you and congratulations. That was a great vote yesterday. Thank you very much.Q Mr. President —THE PRESIDENT: Yes, go ahead. Go ahead.Q In your remarks, sir, you said that you were too new to politics, earlier in your administration, when you would’ve preferred that this be done. Is that an admission of how you might be changing on the job? And —THE PRESIDENT: Well, I’m learning. I mean, I am learning. Don’t forget, it’s not like I’ve done this for — a senator came into my office and said, “Sir, I’ve been running for office for 30 years. I’ve won seven out of seven. I did lose a couple when I was younger.” I said, “Well, I’ve won one out of one. But, you know, I never did politics before. Now I do politics.” I will tell you, I’m very disappointed at certain people, a particular one, for not having pushed this faster.Q Are you referring to Speaker Ryan, sir?THE PRESIDENT: But I’ve learned — who?Q Speaker Ryan.THE PRESIDENT: Let’s not talk about it.Q Okay.THE PRESIDENT: What difference does it make? But they should have pushed it faster. They should have pushed it harder. And they didn’t. They didn’t.If they would have, it would have been a little bit better. In the meantime, I’ve built a lot of wall. I have a lot of money, and I’ve built a lot of wall. But it would’ve been nice to have gotten done. And I would like to see major immigration reform, and maybe that’s something we can all work on, Bill, where we all get together and do major immigration reform — not just for a wall, for a barrier; for port of entry, for other things.We have a real problem. We have catch-and-release. You catch a criminal and you have to release them. We have so many other things. You have chain migration, where a bad person comes in, brings 22 or 23 or 35 of his family members — because he has his mother, his grandmother, his sister, his cousin, his uncle — they’re all in.You know what happened on the West Side Highway. That young wise guy drove over and killed eight people and horribly injured — nobody talks about that — horribly — like, loss of legs and arms — going 60 miles an hour, he made a right turn into a park on the West Side Highway, along the Hudson River in New York. He had many people brought in because he was in the United States. It’s called chain migration.And then you have the lottery. It’s a horror show, because when countries put people into the lottery, they’re not putting you in; they’re putting some very bad people in the lottery. It’s common sense. If I ran a country, and if I have a lottery system of people going to the United States, I’m not going to put in my stars; I’m going to put in people I don’t want. The lottery system is a disaster. I’m stuck with it.Q Mr. President, could you tell us —THE PRESIDENT: It should have — wait. It should have never happened. Okay.Q Mr. President, could you tell us to what degree some of the outside conservative voices helped to shape your views on this national emergency?THE PRESIDENT: I would talk about it. Look, Sean Hannity has been a terrific, terrific supporter of what I do. Not of me. If I changed my views, he wouldn’t be with me.Rush Limbaugh — I think he’s a great guy. Here’s a guy who can speak for three hours without a phone call. Try doing that sometime. For three hours, he speaks. He’s got one of the biggest audiences in the history of the world. I mean, this guy is unbelievable. Try speaking for three hours without taking calls. Taking calls is easy. “Okay, I’ll answer this one. I’ll answer that one.” He goes for three hours, and he’s got an audience that’s fantastic.Q Should they be —THE PRESIDENT: Wait —Q Should they be deciding policy, sir?THE PRESIDENT: They don’t decide policy. In fact, if I went opposite — I mean, they have somebody — Ann Coulter. I don’t know her. I hardly know her. I haven’t spoken to her in way over a year. But the press loves saying “Ann Coulter.” Probably, if I did speak to her, she’d be very nice. I just don’t have the time to speak to her. I would speak to her; I have nothing against her.In fact, I like her for one reason: When they asked her, like right at the beginning, who was going to win the election, she said, “Donald Trump.” And the two people that asked her that question smiled. They said, “You’re kidding, aren’t you?” “Nope. Donald Trump.”So I like her, but she’s off the reservation. But anybody that knows her understands that. But I haven’t spoken to her. I don’t follow her. I don’t talk to her. But the press loves to bring up the name “Ann Coulter.” And you know what? I think she’s fine. I think she’s good. But I just don’t speak to her.Laura has been great. Laura Ingraham. Tucker Carlson has been great. I actually have a couple people on CNN that have been very good. I have some on MSNBC. The other day, they did a great report of me. I said, “Where the hell did that come from?” I think it was the only one in over a year.So the crazy thing is, I just had, as you know, Rasmussen — 52 percent in the polls. It’s my highest poll number. And people get what we’re doing. They get it. They really get it. And I’m honored by it.Yes. Jim Acosta.Q Thank you, Mr. President. I wonder if you could comment on this disconnect that we seem to have in this country, where you are presenting information about what’s happening at the border — calling it an “invasion,” talking about women with duct tape over their mouths, and so on — and yet there’s a lot of reporting out there, there’s a lot of crime data out there, there’s a lot of Department of Homeland Security data out there that shows border crossings at a near-record low —THE PRESIDENT: That’s because of us. But it’s still —Q — that shows undocumented immigrants committing crime at lower levels —THE PRESIDENT: Excuse me. It’s still massive numbers of crossings.Q — that shows undocumented criminals — or undocumented immigrants committing crime at lower levels than native-born Americans. What do you say —THE PRESIDENT: You don’t really believe that stat, do you? Do you really believe that stat?Q What do you — well, let me ask you this —THE PRESIDENT: Take a look at our federal prisons.Q I believe in facts and statistics and data, but —THE PRESIDENT: Okay? Any more? Quick, let’s go.Q Let me just ask you this: What do you say to your critics who say that you are creating a national emergency, that you’re concocting a national emergency here in order to get your wall because you couldn’t get it through other ways?THE PRESIDENT: I ask the Angel Moms: What do you think? Do you think I’m creating something?Ask these incredible women, who lost their daughters and their sons. Okay?PARTICIPANT: This is real.THE PRESIDENT: Because your question is a very political question because you have an agenda. You’re CNN. You’re fake news. You have an agenda. The numbers that you gave are wrong.Take a look at our federal prison population. See how many of them, percentage-wise, are illegal aliens. Just see. Go ahead and see. It’s a fake question.Yes. Go ahead.Q Can I ask a follow-up?Q Thank you, Mr. President. Just to follow up on that, unifying crime reporting statistics — numbers from your own Border Patrol, numbers from this government — show that the amount of illegal immigrants are down, there is not violence on the border, and that most —THE PRESIDENT: There’s not violence on the border?Q There’s not as much violence as —THE PRESIDENT: Oh, really?Q Let me — wait a minute. Wait a minute. Wait —THE PRESIDENT: You had 26 people killed —Q Let me finish the question, please. Let me finish the question, please.THE PRESIDENT: Two weeks ago, 26 people were killed in a gunfight on the border —Q I understand what you’re — I understand what you’re saying.THE PRESIDENT: — a mile away from where I went.Q I was there. I understand. That’s not the question. The question is —THE PRESIDENT: Do we forget about that?Q No, I’m not forgetting about it. I’m asking you to clarify where you get your numbers, because most of the DEA crime reporting statistics that we see show that drugs are coming across at the ports of entry, that illegal immigration is down, and the violence is down.THE PRESIDENT: Okay.Q So what do you base your facts on?THE PRESIDENT: Okay, let me — come on, let’s go. Sort of — sort of —Q And, secondly —THE PRESIDENT: No, no. You get one. You get one. Ready?Q Well, the second question is —THE PRESIDENT: Just sit down. Wait. Sit down. Sit down.Q Could you please answer it?THE PRESIDENT: Sit down. You get one question.I get my numbers from a lot of sources — like Homeland Security, primarily. And the numbers that I have from Homeland Security are a disaster. And you know what else is a disaster? The numbers that come out of Homeland Security, Kirstjen, for the cost that we spend and the money that we lose because of illegal immigration: Billions and billions of dollars a month. Billions and billions of dollars. And it’s unnecessary.Q So your own government stats are wrong, are you saying?THE PRESIDENT: No, no. I use many stats. I use many stats.Q Could you share those stats with us?THE PRESIDENT: Let me tell you, you have stats that are far worse than the ones that I use. But I use many stats, but I also use Homeland Security.All right, next question.Q And do you — wait a minute. Just a quick follow-up.THE PRESIDENT: Go ahead. No. Go. Please.Q Thank you, Mr. President. I just want to bring you back to China for a second. The White House put out a statement today talking about the March 1st deadline. The other day, though, you gave the possibility that maybe this could slide. Are you eyeing a possible extension — 30 days, maybe 60 days? What is the status there? Or is March 1st the deadline?THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. Very good question. So it’s a very big deal. I guess you could say it’s like — must be the biggest deal ever made, if you think. Trade with China, how big does that get? Although if you look, the USCMA is right up there. But it’s very complicated. There are many, many points that we’re bringing up that nobody ever brought up or thought to bring up, but they’re very important, because we were on the wrong side of every one of them.There is a possibility that I will extend the date. And if I do that, if I see that we’re close to a deal or the deal is going in the right direction, I would do that at the same tariffs that we’re charging now. I would not increase the tariffs.Q Let me also ask you about the debt, sir, because it’s gone from a shade under $20 trillion from when you took office. Now it’s a shade over $22 trillion and heading in the wrong direction. What are your plans to reverse it?THE PRESIDENT: Well, it’s all about growth. But before I —Q (Inaudible.)THE PRESIDENT: — really focus on that — and you have to remember, President Obama put on more debt on this country than every President in the history of our country combined. So when I took over, we had one man that put on more debt than every other President combined. Combine them all. So you can’t be talking about that. But I talk about it because I consider it very important.But first, I have to straighten out the military. The military was depleted. And if we don’t have a strong military — that hopefully we won’t have to use because it’s strong — if we don’t have a strong military, you don’t have to worry about debt; you have bigger problems. So I have to straighten out the military. That’s why I did the $700- and $716 billion. But growth will straighten it out.You saw last month, the trade deficit went way down. Everybody said, “What happened?” Well, what’s happening is growth. But before I can focus too much on that, a very big expense is military. And we have no choice but to straighten out our military.Q Is growth the only answer, sir, or is (inaudible)?THE PRESIDENT: Yes, ma’am, go ahead.Q Thank you, Mr. President. On North Korea — back on the last summit, you guys came out with a pretty general agreement.THE PRESIDENT: Yes.Q I was wondering what you thought has, you know, been accomplished since the last summit. And then —THE PRESIDENT: A lot.Q — are we going to be seeing anything concrete —THE PRESIDENT: A lot has been accomplished. Okay.Q — on denuclearization.THE PRESIDENT: Yeah. A lot has been accomplished. We’re dealing with them, we’re talking to them.When I came into office, I met right there, in the Oval Office, with President Obama. And I sat in those beautiful chairs and we talked. It was supposed to be 15 minutes. As you know, it ended up being many times longer than that.And I said, “What’s the biggest problem?” He said, “By far, North Korea.” And I don’t want to speak for him, but I believe he would have gone to war with North Korea. I think he was ready to go to war. In fact, he told me he was so close to starting a big war with North Korea. And where are we now? No missiles. No rockets. No nuclear testing. We’ve learned a lot.But much more importantly than all of it — much more important — much, much more important that that is we have a great relationship. I have a very good relationship with Kim Jong Un. And I’ve done a job. In fact, I think I can say this: Prime Minister Abe of Japan gave me the most beautiful copy of a letter that he sent to the people who give out a thing called the Nobel Prize. He said, “I have nominated you…” or “Respectfully, on behalf of Japan, I am asking them to give you the Nobel Peace Prize.” I said, “Thank you.” Many other people feel that way too. I’ll probably never get it, but that’s okay.They gave it to Obama. He didn’t even know what he got it for. He was there for about 15 seconds and he got the Nobel Prize. He said, “Oh, what did I get it for?” With me, I probably will never get it.But if you look at Idlib Province in Syria, I stopped the slaughter of perhaps 3 million people. Nobody talk about that. They don’t talk about that. Russia and Iran and Syria were going to go in and perhaps destroy 3 million people in order to get 45,000 terrorists. And I heard about it from a woman who had her parents and her brothers living there, and she said, “Please, please.” And I thought — I said, “No, it can’t happen. What are you talking about?” “No, they’re going to get…” And I come home, and I read a certain paper where the story was there that they were actually forming to go into — to really — to really do big destruction. And I put out a statement that “you better not do it.”And in all fairness to Russia and Iran and Syria, they didn’t attack. Or they’re doing it surgically, at least. Saved a lot of people. We do a lot of good work. This administration does a tremendous job, and we don’t get credit for it. But I think the people understand what we do.So Prime Minister Abe gave me — I mean, it’s the most beautiful five letter — five-page letter. Nobel Prize. He sent it to them. You know why? Because he had rocket ships and he had missiles flying over Japan. And they had alarms going off; you know that. Now, all of a sudden, they feel good; they feel safe. I did that.And it was a very tough dialogue at the beginning. Fire and fury. Total annihilation. “My button is bigger than yours” and “my button works.” Remember that? You don’t remember that. And people said, “Trump is crazy.” And you know what it ended up being? A very good relationship. I like him a lot and he likes me a lot. Nobody else would have done that.The Obama administration couldn’t have done it. Number one, they probably wouldn’t have done it. And number two, they didn’t have the capability to do it.So I just want to thank everybody. I want to wish our Attorney General great luck and speed, and enjoy your life. (Laughter.) Bill, good luck. A tremendous reputation. I know you’ll do a great job. Thank you very much. And thank you, everybody. Thank you very much. Thank you. <main id="main-content">Madam Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, theFirst Lady of the United States, and my fellow Americans:We meet tonight at a moment of unlimited potential.As we begin a new Congress, I stand here ready to work with you to achieve historic breakthroughs for all Americans.Millions of our fellow citizens are watching us now, gathered in this great chamber, hoping that we will govern not as two parties but as one Nation.The agenda I will lay out this evening is not a Republican agenda or a Democrat agenda.It is the agenda of the American people.Many of us campaigned on the same core promises:to defend American jobs and demand fair trade for American workers; to rebuild and revitalize our Nation’s infrastructure; to reduce the price of healthcare and prescription drugs; to create an immigration system that is safe, lawful, modern, and secure; and to pursue a foreign policy that puts America’s interests first.There is a new opportunity in American politics, if only we have the courage to seize it.Victory is not winning for our party.Victory is winning for our country.This year, America will recognize two important anniversaries that show us the majesty of America’s mission, andthe power of American pride.In June, we mark 75 years since the start of what General Dwight D. Eisenhower called the Great Crusade—the Allied liberation of Europe in World War II.On D-Day, June 6, 1944, 15,000 young American men jumped from the sky, and 60,000 more stormed in from the sea, to save our civilization from tyranny.Here with us tonight are three of those heroes:Private First Class Joseph Reilly, Staff Sergeant Irving Locker, and Sergeant Herman Zeitchik.Gentlemen, we salute you.In 2019, we also celebrate 50 years since brave young pilots flew a quarter of a million miles through space to plant the American flag on the face of the moon.Half a century later, we are joined by one of the Apollo 11 astronauts who planted that flag:Buzz Aldrin. This year, American astronauts will go back to space on American rockets.In the 20th century, America saved freedom, transformed science, and redefined the middle class standard of living for the entire world to see.Now, we must step boldly and bravely into the next chapter of this great American adventure, and we must create a new standard of living for the 21st century.An amazing quality of life for all of our citizens is within our reach.We can make our communities safer, our families stronger, our culture richer, our faith deeper, and our middle class bigger and more prosperous than ever before.But we must reject the politics of revenge, resistance, andretribution—and embrace the boundless potential of cooperation, compromise, and the common good.Together, we can break decades of political stalemate.We can bridge old divisions, heal old wounds, build new coalitions, forge new solutions, and unlock the extraordinary promise of America’s future.The decision is ours to make.We must choose between greatness or gridlock, results or resistance, vision or vengeance, incredible progress or pointless destruction.Tonight, I ask you to choose greatness.Over the last 2 years, my administration has moved with urgency and historic speed to confront problems neglected by leaders of both parties over many decades.In just over 2 years since the election, we have launched an unprecedented economic boom—a boom that has rarely been seen before.We have created 5.3 million new jobs and importantly added 600,000 new manufacturing jobs—something which almost everyone said was impossible to do, but the fact is, we are just getting started.Wages are rising at the fastest pace in decades, and growing for blue collar workers, who I promised to fight for, faster than anyone else.Nearly 5 million Americans have been lifted off food stamps.The United States economy is growing almost twice as fast today as when I took office, and we are considered far and away the hottest economy anywhere in the world.Unemployment has reached the lowest rate in half a century. African American, Hispanic American, and Asian American unemployment have all reached their lowest levels ever recorded. Unemployment for Americans with disabilities has also reached an all-time low.More people are working now than at any time in our history–-157 million.We passed a massive tax cut for working families and doubled the child tax credit.We virtually ended the estate, or death, tax on small businesses, ranches, and family farms.We eliminated the very unpopular Obamacare individual mandate penalty—and to give critically ill patients access to life-saving cures, we passed right to try.My administration has cut more regulations in a short time than any other administration during its entire tenure.Companies are coming back to our country in large numbers thanks to historic reductions in taxes and regulations.We have unleashed a revolution in American energy—the United States is now the number one producer of oil and natural gas in the world.And now, for the first time in 65 years, we are a net exporter of energy.After 24 months of rapid progress, our economy is the envy of the world, our military is the most powerful on earth, and America is winning each and every day.Members of Congress:the State of our Union is strong.Our country is vibrant and our economy is thriving like never before.On Friday, it was announced that we added another 304,000 jobs last month alone—almost double what was expected.An economic miracle is taking place in the United States—and theonly thing that can stop it are foolish wars, politics, or ridiculous partisan investigations.If there is going to be peace and legislation, there cannot be war and investigation. It just doesn’t work that way!We must be united at home to defeat our adversaries abroad.This new era of cooperation can start with finally confirming the more than 300 highly qualified nominees who are still stuck in the Senate, some after years of waiting.The Senate has failed to act on these nominations, which is unfair to the nominees and to our country.Now is the time for bipartisan action.Believe it or not, we have already proven that it is possible.In the last Congress, both parties came together to pass unprecedented legislation to confront the opioid crisis, a sweeping new Farm Bill, historic VA reforms, and after four decades of rejection, we passed VA Accountability so we can finally terminate those who mistreat our wonderful veterans.And just weeks ago, both parties united for groundbreaking criminal justice reform.Last year, I heard through friends the story of Alice Johnson.I was deeply moved.In 1997, Alice was sentenced to life in prison as a first-time non-violent drug offender.Over the next two decades, she became a prison minister, inspiring others to choose a better path.She had abig impact on that prison population—and far beyond.Alice’s story underscores the disparities and unfairness that can exist in criminal sentencing—and the need to remedy this injustice.She served almost 22 years and had expected to be in prison for the rest of her life.In June, I commuted Alice’s sentence, and she is here with us tonight.Alice, thank you for reminding us that we always have the power to shape our own destiny.When I saw Alice’s beautiful family greet her at the prison gates, hugging and kissing and crying and laughing, I knew I did the right thing.Inspired by stories like Alice’s, my administration worked closely with members of both parties to sign the First Step Act into law.This legislation reformed sentencing laws that have wrongly and disproportionately harmed the African American community.The First Step Act gives non-violent offenders the chance to re-enter society as productive, law-abiding citizens. Now, States across the country are following our lead. America is a Nation that believes in redemption.We are also joined tonight by Matthew Charles from Tennessee.In 1996, at age 30, Matthew was sentenced to 35 years for selling drugs and related offenses. Over the next two decades, he completed more than 30 Bible studies, became a law clerk, and mentored fellow inmates. Now, Matthew is the very first person to be released from prison under the First Step Act.Matthew, on behalf of all Americans: welcome home.As we have seen, when we are united, we can make astonishing strides for our country.Now, Republicans and Democrats must join forces again to confront an urgent national crisis.The Congress has 10 days left to pass a bill that will fund our government, protect our homeland, and secure our southern border.Now is the time for the Congress to show the world that America is committed to ending illegal immigration and putting the ruthless coyotes, cartels, drug dealers, and human traffickers out of business.As we speak, large, organized caravans are on the march to the United States.We have just heard that Mexican cities, in order to remove the illegal immigrants from their communities, are getting trucks and buses to bring them up to our country in areas where there is little border protection.I have ordered another 3,750 troops to our southern border to prepare for the tremendous onslaught.This is a moral issue.The lawless state of our southern border is a threat to the safety, security, and financial well‑being of all Americans.We have a moral duty to create animmigration system that protects the lives and jobs of our citizens.This includes our obligation to the millions of immigrants living here today, who followed the rules and respected our laws. Legal immigrants enrich our Nation and strengthen our society in countless ways.I want people to come into our country, but they have to come in legally.Tonight, I am asking you to defend our very dangerous southern border out of love and devotion to our fellow citizens and to our country.No issue better illustrates the divide between America’s working class and America’s political class than illegal immigration.Wealthy politicians and donors push for open borders while living their lives behind walls and gates and guards.Meanwhile, working class Americans are left to pay the price for mass illegal migration—reduced jobs, lower wages, overburdened schools and hospitals, increased crime, and adepleted social safety net.Tolerance for illegal immigration is not compassionate—it is cruel.One in three women is sexually assaulted on the long journey north. Smugglers use migrant children as human pawns to exploit our laws and gain access to our country.Human traffickers and sex traffickers take advantage of the wide open areas between our ports of entry tosmuggle thousands of young girls and women into the UnitedStates and to sell them into prostitution and modern-day slavery.Tens of thousands of innocent Americans are killed by lethal drugs that cross our border and flood into our cities—including meth, heroin, cocaine, and fentanyl.The savage gang, MS-13, now operates in 20 different American states, and they almost all come through our southern border.Just yesterday, an MS-13 gang member was taken into custody for a fatal shooting on a subway platform in New York City.We are removing these gang members by the thousands, but until we secure our border they’re going to keep streaming backin.Year after year, countless Americans are murdered by criminal illegal aliens.I’ve gotten to know many wonderful Angel Moms, Dads, and families—no one should ever have to suffer the horrible heartache they have endured.Here tonight is Debra Bissell.Just three weeks ago, Debra’s parents, Gerald and Sharon, were burglarized and shot todeath in their Reno, Nevada, home by an illegal alien. Theywere in their eighties and are survived by four children, 11grandchildren, and 20 great-grandchildren. Also here tonight are Gerald and Sharon’s granddaughter, Heather, and great‑granddaughter, Madison.To Debra, Heather, Madison, please stand: few can understand your pain.But I will never forget, and I will fight for the memory of Gerald and Sharon, that it should never happen again.Not one more American life should be lost because our Nation failed to control its very dangerous border.In the last 2 years, our brave ICE officers made 266,000 arrests of criminal aliens, including those charged or convicted of nearly 100,000 assaults, 30,000 sex crimes, and 4,000 killings.We are joined tonight by one of those law enforcement heroes:ICE Special Agent Elvin Hernandez.When Elvin was a boy, he and his family legally immigrated to the United States from the Dominican Republic.At the age of eight, Elvin told his dad he wanted to become a Special Agent.Today, he leads investigations into the scourge of international sex trafficking.Elvin says: “If I can make sure these young girls get their justice, I’ve done my job.”Thanks to his work and that of his colleagues, more than 300 women and girls have been rescued from horror, and more than 1,500 sadistic traffickers have been put behind bars in the last year.Special Agent Hernandez, please stand:We will always support the brave men and women of Law Enforcement—and I pledge to you tonight that we will never abolish our heroes from ICE.My administration has sent to the Congress a commonsense proposal to end the crisis on our southern border.It includes humanitarian assistance, more law enforcement, drug detection at our ports, closing loopholes that enable child smuggling, and plans for a new physical barrier, or wall, to secure the vast areas between our ports of entry.In the past, most of the people in this room voted for a wall—but the proper wall never got built. I’ll get it built.This is a smart, strategic, see-through steel barrier—not just a simple concrete wall. It will be deployed in the areas identified by border agents as having the greatest need, and as these agents will tell you, where walls go up, illegal crossings go way down.San Diego used to have the most illegal border crossings in the country.In response, and at the request of San Diego residents and political leaders, a strong security wall was put in place.This powerful barrier almost completely ended illegal crossings.The border city of El Paso, Texas, used to have extremely high rates of violent crime—one of the highest in the country, and considered one of our Nation’s most dangerous cities.Now, with a powerful barrier in place, El Paso is oneof our safest cities.Simply put, walls work and walls save lives.So let’s work together, compromise, and reach a deal that will truly make America safe.As we work to defend our people’s safety, we must also ensure our economic resurgence continues at a rapid pace.No one has benefitted more from our thriving economy than women, who have filled 58 percent of the new jobs created in the last year. All Americans can be proud that we have more women in the workforce than ever before—and exactly one century after the Congress passed the Constitutional amendment giving women the right to vote, we also have more women serving in the Congress than ever before.As part of our commitment to improving opportunity for women everywhere, this Thursday we are launching the first ever Government-wide initiative focused on economic empowerment for women in developing countries.To build on our incredible economic success, one priority is paramount—reversing decades of calamitous trade policies.We are now making it clear to China that after years of targeting our industriesand stealing our intellectual property, the theft ofAmerican jobs and wealth has come to an end.Therefore, we recently imposed tariffs on $250 billion of Chinese goods—and now our Treasury is receiving billions of dollars a month from a country that never gave us adime.But Idon’t blame China for taking advantage of us—Iblame our leaders and representatives for allowing this travesty to happen.I have great respect for President Xi, and we are now working on a new trade deal with China.But it must include real, structural change to end unfair trade practices, reduce our chronic trade deficit, and protect American jobs.Another historic trade blunder was the catastrophe known as NAFTA.I have met the men and women of Michigan, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Indiana, New Hampshire, and many other states whose dreams were shattered by NAFTA.For years, politicians promised them they would negotiate for a better deal. But no one ever tried—until now.Our new U.S.-Mexico-Canada Agreement—or USMCA—will replace NAFTA and deliver for American workers:bringing backour manufacturing jobs, expanding American agriculture, protecting intellectual property, and ensuring that more cars are proudly stamped with four beautiful words:made in the USA.Tonight, I am also asking you to pass the United States Reciprocal Trade Act, so that if another country places an unfair tariff on an American product, we can charge them the exact same tariff on the same product that they sell to us.Both parties should be able to unite for a great rebuilding of America’s crumbling infrastructure.I know that the Congress is eager to pass an infrastructure bill—and I am eager to work with you on legislation to deliver new and important infrastructure investment, including investments in the cutting edge industries of the future.This is not an option.This is a necessity.The next major priority for me, and for all of us, should be to lower the cost of healthcare and prescription drugs—and to protect patients with pre-existing conditions.Already, as a result of my administration’s efforts, in 2018 drug prices experienced their single largest decline in 46years.But we must do more.It is unacceptable that Americans pay vastly more than people in other countries for the exact same drugs, often made in the exact same place.This is wrong, unfair, and together we can stop it.I am asking the Congress to pass legislation that finally takes on the problem of global freeloading and delivers fairness and price transparency for American patients. We should also require drug companies, insurance companies, and hospitals to disclose real prices to foster competition and bring costs down.No force in history has done more to advance the human condition than American freedom.In recent years we have made remarkable progress in the fight against HIV and AIDS.Scientific breakthroughs have brought a once-distant dream within reach.My budget will ask Democrats and Republicans to make the needed commitment to eliminate the HIV epidemic in the United States within 10 years.Together, we will defeat AIDS inAmerica.Tonight, I am also asking you to join me in another fight that all Americans can get behind:the fight against childhood cancer.Joining Melania in the gallery this evening is a very brave 10-year-old girl, Grace Eline. Every birthday since she was 4, Grace asked her friends to donate to St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital.She did not know that one day she might be apatient herself.Last year, Grace was diagnosed with brain cancer.Immediately, she began radiation treatment.At the same time, she rallied her community and raised more than $40,000 for the fight against cancer. When Grace completed treatment last fall, her doctors and nurses cheered with tears in their eyes as she hung up a poster that read:“Last Day of Chemo.”Grace—you are an inspiration to us all.Many childhood cancers have not seen new therapies in decades.My budget will ask the Congress for $500 million over the next 10 years to fund this critical life-saving research.To help support working parents, the time has come to pass school choice for America’s children.I am also proud to be the first President to include in my budget a plan for nationwide paid family leave—so that every new parent has the chance to bond with their newborn child.There could be no greater contrast to the beautiful image of a mother holding her infant child than the chilling displays our Nation saw in recent days.Lawmakers in New York cheered with delight upon the passage of legislation that would allow ababy to be ripped from the mother’s womb moments before birth.These are living, feeling, beautiful babies who will never get the chance to share their love and dreams with the world.And then, we had the case of the Governor of Virginia where he basically stated he would execute a baby after birth.To defend the dignity of every person, I am asking the Congress to pass legislation to prohibit the late-term abortion of children who can feel pain in the mother’s womb.Let us work together to build a culture that cherishes innocent life.And let us reaffirm a fundamental truth:all children—born and unborn— are made in the holy image ofGod.The final part of my agenda is to protect America’s National Security.Over the last 2 years, we have begun to fully rebuild theUnited States Military—with $700 billion last year and $716 billion this year.We are also getting other nations to pay their fair share.For years, the United States was being treated very unfairly by NATO—but now we have secured a $100billion increase in defense spending fromNATO allies.As part of our military build-up, the United States is developing a state-of-the-art Missile Defense System.Under my administration, we will never apologize for advancing America’s interests.For example, decades ago the United States entered into atreaty with Russia in which we agreed to limit and reduce our missile capabilities.While we followed the agreement to the letter, Russia repeatedly violated its terms.That is why Iannounced that the United States is officially withdrawing from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, or INF Treaty.Perhaps we can negotiate a different agreement, adding China and others, or perhaps we can’t–-in which case, we will outspend and out-innovate all others by far.As part of a bold new diplomacy, we continue our historic push for peace on the Korean Peninsula.Our hostages have come home, nuclear testing has stopped, and there has not been a missile launch in 15 months. If I had not been elected President of the United States, we would right now, in my opinion, be in a major war with North Korea with potentially millions of people killed.Much work remains to be done, but my relationship with Kim Jong Un is a good one.And Chairman Kim and I will meet again on February 27 and 28 in Vietnam.Two weeks ago, the United States officially recognized the legitimate government of Venezuela, and its new interim President, Juan Guaido.We stand with the Venezuelan people in their noble quest for freedom—and we condemn the brutality of the Maduro regime, whose socialist policies have turned that nation from being the wealthiest in South America into a state of abject poverty and despair.Here, in the United States, we are alarmed by new calls to adopt socialism in our country.America was founded on liberty and independence–-not government coercion, domination, and control.We are born free, and we will stay free.Tonight, werenew our resolve that America will never be a socialist country.One of the most complex set of challenges we face is in the Middle East.Our approach is based on principled realism—not discredited theories that have failed for decades to yield progress.For this reason, my administration recognized the true capital of Israel—and proudly opened the American Embassy in Jerusalem.Our brave troops have now been fighting in the Middle East for almost 19 years.In Afghanistan and Iraq, nearly 7,000 American heroes have given their lives.More than 52,000 Americans have been badly wounded.We have spent more than $7trillion in the Middle East.As a candidate for President, I pledged a new approach. Great nations do not fight endless wars.When I took office, ISIS controlled more than 20,000 square miles in Iraq and Syria.Today, we have liberated virtually all of that territory from the grip of these bloodthirsty killers.Now, as we work with our allies to destroy the remnants of ISIS, it is time to give our brave warriors in Syria a warm welcome home.I have also accelerated our negotiations to reach a political settlement in Afghanistan.Our troops have fought with unmatched valor—and thanks to their bravery, we are now able to pursue a political solution to this long and bloody conflict.In Afghanistan, my administration is holding constructive talks with a number of Afghan groups, including the Taliban.As we make progress in these negotiations, we will be able to reduce our troop presence and focus on counter-terrorism.We do not know whether we will achieve an agreement—but we do know that after two decades of war, the hour has come to at least try for peace.Above all, friend and foe alike must never doubt this Nation’s power and will to defend our people.Eighteen years ago, terrorists attacked the USS Cole—and last month American forces killed one of the leaders of the attack.We are honored to be joined tonight by Tom Wibberley, whose son, Navy Seaman Craig Wibberley, was one of the 17 sailors we tragically lost. Tom: we vow to always remember the heroes of the USS Cole.My administration has acted decisively to confront the world’s leading state sponsor of terror: the radical regime in Iran.To ensure this corrupt dictatorship never acquires nuclear weapons, I withdrew the United States from the disastrous Iran nuclear deal.And last fall, we put in place the toughest sanctions ever imposed on a country.We will not avert our eyes from a regime that chants death to America and threatens genocide against the Jewish people.We must never ignore the vile poison of anti-Semitism, or those who spread its venomous creed.With one voice, we must confront this hatred anywhere and everywhere it occurs.Just months ago, 11 Jewish-Americans were viciously murdered in an anti-semitic attack on the Tree of Life Synagogue in Pittsburgh.SWAT Officer Timothy Matson raced into the gunfire and was shot seven times chasing down the killer.Timothy has just had his 12th surgery—but he made the trip tobe here with us tonight.Officer Matson: we are forever grateful for your courage in the face of evil.Tonight, we are also joined by Pittsburgh survivor Judah Samet.He arrived at the synagogue as the massacre began. But not only did Judah narrowly escape death last fall—more than seven decades ago, he narrowly survived the Nazi concentration camps. Today is Judah’s 81st birthday.Judah says he can still remember the exact moment, nearly 75 years ago, after 10 months in a concentration camp, when he and his family were put on a train, and told they were going to another camp.Suddenly the train screeched to a halt.A soldier appeared.Judah’s family braced for the worst.Then, his father cried out with joy: “It’s the Americans.”A second Holocaust survivor who is here tonight, Joshua Kaufman, was a prisoner at Dachau Concentration Camp. He remembers watching through a hole in the wall of a cattle car as American soldiers rolled in with tanks.“To me,” Joshua recalls, “the American soldiers were proof that God exists, and they came down from the sky.”I began this evening by honoring three soldiers who fought on D-Day in the Second World War. One of them was Herman Zeitchik.But there is more to Herman’s story. A year after he stormed the beaches of Normandy, Herman was one of those American soldiers who helped liberate Dachau.He was one of the Americans who helped rescue Joshua from that hell onearth. Almost 75 years later, Herman and Joshua are both together in the gallery tonight—seated side-by-side, here in the home of American freedom.Herman and Joshua:your presence this evening honors and uplifts our entire Nation.When American soldiers set out beneath the dark skies over the English Channel in the early hours of D-Day, 1944, they were just young men of 18 and 19, hurtling on fragile landing craft toward the most momentous battle in the history of war.They did not know if they would survive the hour. They did not know if they would grow old.But they knew that America had to prevail. Their cause was this Nation, and generations yet unborn.Why did they do it? They did it for America—they did it for us.Everything that has come since—our triumph over communism, our giant leaps of science and discovery, our unrivaled progress toward equality and justice—all of it is possible thanks to the blood and tears and courage and vision of the Americans who came before.Think of this Capitol—think of this very chamber, where lawmakers before you voted to end slavery, to build the railroads and the highways, to defeat fascism, to secure civil rights, to face down an evil empire.Here tonight, we have legislators from across this magnificent republic.You have come from the rocky shores of Maine and the volcanic peaks of Hawaii; from the snowy woods of Wisconsin and the red deserts of Arizona; from the green farms of Kentucky and the golden beaches of California. Together, we represent the most extraordinary Nation in all of history.What will we do with this moment? How will we be remembered?I ask the men and women of this Congress:Look at the opportunities before us!Our most thrilling achievements are still ahead.Our most exciting journeys still await.Our biggest victories are still to come. We have not yet begun todream.We must choose whether we are defined by our differences—or whether we dare to transcend them.We must choose whether we will squander our inheritance—or whether we will proudly declare that we are Americans. We do the incredible.We defy the impossible.We conquer the unknown.This is the time to re-ignite the American imagination.This is the time to search for the tallest summitand set our sights on the brightest star. This is the time to rekindle the bonds of love and loyalty and memory that link us together as citizens, as neighbors, as patriots.This is our future—our fate—and our choice to make. Iam asking you to choose greatness.No matter the trials we face, no matter the challenges to come, we must go forward together.We must keep America first in our hearts.We must keep freedom alive in our souls. And we must always keep faith in America’s destiny—that one Nation, under God, must be the hope and the promise and the light and the glory among all the nations of the world!Thank you. God Bless You, God Bless America, and good night!</main><footer></footer> THE PRESIDENT:Just a short time ago, I had the honor of presiding over the swearing-in of five new great American citizens.It was a beautiful ceremony and a moving reminder of our nation’s proud history of welcoming legal immigrants from all over the world into our national family.I told them that the beauty and majesty of citizenship is that it draws no distinctions of race, or class, or faith, or gender or background.All Americans, whether first generation or tenth generation, are bound together in love and loyalty, friendship and affection.We are all equal.We are one team, and one people, proudly saluting one great American flag.We believe in a safe and lawful system of immigration, one that upholds our laws, our traditions, and our most cherished values.Unfortunately, our immigration system has been badly broken for a very long time.Over the decades, many Presidents and many lawmakers have come and gone, and no real progress has been made on immigration.We are now living with the consequences—and they are tragic—brought about by decades of political stalemate, partisan gridlock, and national neglect.There is a humanitarian and security crisis on our southern border that requires urgent action.Thousands of children are being exploited by ruthless coyotes and vicious cartels and gangs.One in three women is sexually assaulted on the dangerous journey north.In fact, many loving mothers give their young daughters birth control pills for the long journey up to the United States because they know they may be raped or sexually accosted or assaulted.Nearly 50 migrants a day are being referred for urgent medical care.Vast quantities of lethal narcotics are flooding through our border and into our communities, including meth, cocaine, heroin, and fentanyl.Drugs kill 78,000 Americans a year and cost our society in excess of $700 billion.Heroin alone kills 300 Americans a week, 90 percent of which comes across our southern border.We can stop heroin.Illegal immigration reduces wages and strains public services.The lack of border control provides a gateway—and a very wide and open gateway—for criminals and gang members to enter the United States, including the criminal aliens who murdered a brave California police officer only a day after Christmas.I’ve gotten to know and love Angel moms, dads, and family who lost loved ones to people illegally in our country.I want this to end.It’s got to end now.These are not talking points.These are the heartbreaking realities that are hurting innocent, precious human beings every single day on both sides of the border.As a candidate for President, I promised I would fix this crisis, and I intend to keep that promise one way or the other.Our immigration system should be the subject of pride, not a source of shame, as it is all over the world.Our immigration system should be the envy of the world, not a symbol of disunity and dysfunction.The good news is, these problems can all be solved but only if we have the political courage to do what is just and what is right.Both sides in Washington must simply come together, listen to each other, put down their armor, build trust, reach across the aisle, and find solutions.It is time to reclaim our future from the extreme voices who fear compromise and demand open borders, which means drugs pouring in, human trafficking, and a lot of crime.That is why I am here today, to break the logjam and provide Congress with a path forward to end the government shutdown and solve the crisis on the southern border.If we are successful in this effort, we will then have the best chance in a very long time at real, bipartisan immigration reform.And it won’t stop here.It will keep going until we do it all.The proposal I will outline today is based on, first and foremost, on input from our border agents and homeland security professionals—and professionals they are.They know what they’re doing.It is a compassionate response to the ongoing tragedy on our southern border.In recent weeks, we have met with large numbers of Democrat lawmakers to hear their ideas and suggestions.By incorporating the priorities of rank-and-file Democrats in our plan, we hope they will offer their enthusiastic support.And I think many will.This is a commonsense compromise both parties should embrace.The radical left can never control our borders.I will never let it happen.Walls are not immoral.In fact, they are the opposite of immoral because they will save many lives and stop drugs from pouring into our country.Our plan includes the following: $800 million in urgent humanitarian assistance; $805 million for drug detection technology to help secure our ports of entry; an additional 2,750 border agents and law enforcement professionals; 75 new immigration judge teams to reduce the court backlog of, believe it or not, almost 900,000 cases.However, the whole concept of having lengthy trials for anyone who sets one foot in our country unlawfully must be changed by Congress.It is unsustainable.It is ridiculous.Few places in the world would even consider such an impossible nightmare.Our plan includes critical measures to protect migrant children from exploitation and abuse.This includes a new system to allow Central American minors to apply for asylum in their home countries, and reform to promote family reunification for unaccompanied children, thousands of whom wind up on our border doorstep.To physically secure our border, the plan includes $5.7 billion for a strategic deployment of physical barriers, or a wall.This is not a 2,000-mile concrete structure from sea to sea.These are steel barriers in high-priority locations.Much of the border is already protected by natural barriers such as mountains and water.We already have many miles of barrier, including 115 miles that we are currently building or under contract. It will be done quickly. Our request will add another 230 miles this year in the areas our border agents most urgently need. It will have an unbelievable impact.If we build a powerful and fully designed see-through steel barrier on our southern border, the crime rate and drug problem in our country would be quickly and greatly reduced. Some say it could be cut in half. Because these criminals, drug smugglers, gangs, and traffickers do not stop at our border; they permeate throughout our country and they end up in some places where you’d least expect them.They go all over our country. A steel barrier will help us stop illegal immigration while safely directing commerce to our lawful ports of entry.Many of these security ideas have been proposed by Democrats themselves, and all of them have been supported by Democrats in the past, including a physical barrier, wall, or fence.Furthermore, in order to build the trust and goodwill necessary to begin real immigration reform, there are two more elements to my plan.Number one is three years of legislative relief for 700,000 DACA recipients brought here unlawfully by their parents at a young age many years ago.This extension will give them access to work permits, Social Security numbers, and protection from deportation, most importantly.Secondly, our proposal provides a three-year extension of Temporary Protected Status, or TPS.This means that 300,000 immigrants whose protected status is facing expiration will now have three more years of certainty so that Congress can work on a larger immigration deal, which everybody wants—Republicans and Democrats.And our farmers and vineyards won’t be affected because lawful and regulated entry into our country will be easy and consistent.That is our plan: border security, DACA, TPS, and many other things.Straightforward, fair, reasonable, and common sense, with lots of compromise.Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell has pledged to bring this bill to a vote this week in the United States Senate.Our proposal is not intended to solve all of our immigration challenges. This plan solves the immediate crisis—and it is a horrible crisis.It is a humanitarian crisis like we rarely see in our country.And it provides humanitarian relief, delivers real border security, and immediately reopens our federal government.If we are successful in this effort, then we can start the border [broader] project of remaking our immigration system for the 21st century.Once the government is open and we have made a down payment on border security, and immigration reform starts to happen, I plan to convene weekly bipartisan meetings at the White House so we can do a finished product, a great product—a product that we can all be proud of, having to do with that elusive immigration problem.Whatever we do, I can promise you this: I will never forget that my first duty, and ultimate loyalty, is to you, the American people.Any reforms we make to our immigration system will be designed to improve your lives, make your communities safer, and make our nation more prosperous and secure for generations to come.Thank you and God bless America. Thank you. THE PRESIDENT: Madam President, Mr. Secretary-General, world leaders, ambassadors, and distinguished delegates:One year ago, I stood before you for the first time in this grand hall. I addressed the threats facing our world, and I presented a vision to achieve a brighter future for all of humanity.Today, I stand before the United Nations General Assembly to share the extraordinary progress we’ve made.In less than two years, my administration has accomplished more than almost any administration in the history of our country.America’s—so true. (Laughter.) Didn’t expect that reaction, but that’s okay. (Laughter and applause.)America’s economy is booming like never before. Since my election, we’ve added $10 trillion in wealth. The stock market is at an all-time high in history, and jobless claims are at a 50-year low. African American, Hispanic American, and Asian American unemployment have all achieved their lowest levels ever recorded. We’ve added more than 4 million new jobs, including half a million manufacturing jobs.We have passed the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. We’ve started the construction of a major border wall, and we have greatly strengthened border security.We have secured record funding for our military—$700 billion this year, and $716 billion next year. Our military will soon be more powerful than it has ever been before.In other words, the United States is stronger, safer, and a richer country than it was when I assumed office less than two years ago.We are standing up for America and for the American people. And we are also standing up for the world.This is great news for our citizens and for peace-loving people everywhere. We believe that when nations respect the rights of their neighbors, and defend the interests of their people, they can better work together to secure the blessings of safety, prosperity, and peace.Each of us here today is the emissary of a distinct culture, a rich history, and a people bound together by ties of memory, tradition, and the values that make our homelands like nowhere else on Earth.That is why America will always choose independence and cooperation over global governance, control, and domination.I honor the right of every nation in this room to pursue its own customs, beliefs, and traditions. The United States will not tell you how to live or work or worship.We only ask that you honor our sovereignty in return.From Warsaw to Brussels, to Tokyo to Singapore, it has been my highest honor to represent the United States abroad. I have forged close relationships and friendships and strong partnerships with the leaders of many nations in this room, and our approach has already yielded incredible change.With support from many countries here today, we have engaged with North Korea to replace the specter of conflict with a bold and new push for peace.In June, I traveled to Singapore to meet face to face with North Korea’s leader, Chairman Kim Jong Un.We had highly productive conversations and meetings, and we agreed that it was in both countries’ interest to pursue the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. Since that meeting, we have already seen a number of encouraging measures that few could have imagined only a short time ago.The missiles and rockets are no longer flying in every direction. Nuclear testing has stopped. Some military facilities are already being dismantled. Our hostages have been released. And as promised, the remains of our fallen heroes are being returned home to lay at rest in American soil.I would like to thank Chairman Kim for his courage and for the steps he has taken, though much work remains to be done. The sanctions will stay in place until denuclearization occurs.I also want to thank the many member states who helped us reach this moment—a moment that is actually far greater than people would understand; far greater—but for also their support and the critical support that we will all need going forward.A special thanks to President Moon of South Korea, Prime Minister Abe of Japan, and President Xi of China.In the Middle East, our new approach is also yielding great strides and very historic change.Following my trip to Saudi Arabia last year, the Gulf countries opened a new center to target terrorist financing. They are enforcing new sanctions, working with us to identify and track terrorist networks, and taking more responsibility for fighting terrorism and extremism in their own region.The UAE, Saudi Arabia, and Qatar have pledged billions of dollars to aid the people of Syria and Yemen. And they are pursuing multiple avenues to ending Yemen’s horrible, horrific civil war.Ultimately, it is up to the nations of the region to decide what kind of future they want for themselves and their children.For that reason, the United States is working with the Gulf Cooperation Council, Jordan, and Egypt to establish a regional strategic alliance so that Middle Eastern nations can advance prosperity, stability, and security across their home region.Thanks to the United States military and our partnership with many of your nations, I am pleased to report that the bloodthirsty killers known as ISIS have been driven out from the territory they once held in Iraq and Syria. We will continue to work with friends and allies to deny radical Islamic terrorists any funding, territory or support, or any means of infiltrating our borders.The ongoing tragedy in Syria is heartbreaking. Our shared goals must be the de-escalation of military conflict, along with a political solution that honors the will of the Syrian people. In this vein, we urge the United Nations-led peace process be reinvigorated. But, rest assured, the United States will respond if chemical weapons are deployed by the Assad regime.I commend the people of Jordan and other neighboring countries for hosting refugees from this very brutal civil war.As we see in Jordan, the most compassionate policy is to place refugees as close to their homes as possible to ease their eventual return to be part of the rebuilding process. This approach also stretches finite resources to help far more people, increasing the impact of every dollar spent.Every solution to the humanitarian crisis in Syria must also include a strategy to address the brutal regime that has fueled and financed it: the corrupt dictatorship in Iran.Iran’s leaders sow chaos, death, and destruction. They do not respect their neighbors or borders, or the sovereign rights of nations. Instead, Iran’s leaders plunder the nation’s resources to enrich themselves and to spread mayhem across the Middle East and far beyond.The Iranian people are rightly outraged that their leaders have embezzled billions of dollars from Iran’s treasury, seized valuable portions of the economy, and looted the people’s religious endowments, all to line their own pockets and send their proxies to wage war. Not good.Iran’s neighbors have paid a heavy toll for the region’s [regime’s] agenda of aggression and expansion. That is why so many countries in the Middle East strongly supported my decision to withdraw the United States from the horrible 2015 Iran Nuclear Deal and re-impose nuclear sanctions.The Iran deal was a windfall for Iran’s leaders. In the years since the deal was reached, Iran’s military budget grew nearly 40 percent. The dictatorship used the funds to build nuclear-capable missiles, increase internal repression, finance terrorism, and fund havoc and slaughter in Syria and Yemen.The United States has launched a campaign of economic pressure to deny the regime the funds it needs to advance its bloody agenda. Last month, we began re-imposing hard-hitting nuclear sanctions that had been lifted under the Iran deal. Additional sanctions will resume November 5th, and more will follow. And we’re working with countries that import Iranian crude oil to cut their purchases substantially.We cannot allow the world’s leading sponsor of terrorism to possess the planet’s most dangerous weapons. We cannot allow a regime that chants “Death to America,” and that threatens Israel with annihilation, to possess the means to deliver a nuclear warhead to any city on Earth. Just can’t do it.We ask all nations to isolate Iran’s regime as long as its aggression continues. And we ask all nations to support Iran’s people as they struggle to reclaim their religious and righteous destiny.This year, we also took another significant step forward in the Middle East. In recognition of every sovereign state to determine its own capital, I moved the U.S. Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem.The United States is committed to a future of peace and stability in the region, including peace between the Israelis and the Palestinians. That aim is advanced, not harmed, by acknowledging the obvious facts.America’s policy of principled realism means we will not be held hostage to old dogmas, discredited ideologies, and so-called experts who have been proven wrong over the years, time and time again. This is true not only in matters of peace, but in matters of prosperity.We believe that trade must be fair and reciprocal. The United States will not be taken advantage of any longer.For decades, the United States opened its economy—the largest, by far, on Earth—with few conditions. We allowed foreign goods from all over the world to flow freely across our borders.Yet, other countries did not grant us fair and reciprocal access to their markets in return. Even worse, some countries abused their openness to dump their products, subsidize their goods, target our industries, and manipulate their currencies to gain unfair advantage over our country. As a result, our trade deficit ballooned to nearly $800 billion a year.For this reason, we are systematically renegotiating broken and bad trade deals.Last month, we announced a groundbreaking U.S.-Mexico trade agreement. And just yesterday, I stood with President Moon to announce the successful completion of the brand new U.S.-Korea trade deal. And this is just the beginning.Many nations in this hall will agree that the world trading system is in dire need of change. For example, countries were admitted to the World Trade Organization that violate every single principle on which the organization is based. While the United States and many other nations play by the rules, these countries use government-run industrial planning and state-owned enterprises to rig the system in their favor. They engage in relentless product dumping, forced technology transfer, and the theft of intellectual property.The United States lost over 3 million manufacturing jobs, nearly a quarter of all steel jobs, and 60,000 factories after China joined the WTO. And we have racked up $13 trillion in trade deficits over the last two decades.But those days are over. We will no longer tolerate such abuse. We will not allow our workers to be victimized, our companies to be cheated, and our wealth to be plundered and transferred. America will never apologize for protecting its citizens.The United States has just announced tariffs on another $200 billion in Chinese-made goods for a total, so far, of $250 billion. I have great respect and affection for my friend, President Xi, but I have made clear our trade imbalance is just not acceptable. China’s market distortions and the way they deal cannot be tolerated.As my administration has demonstrated, America will always act in our national interest.I spoke before this body last year and warned that the U.N. Human Rights Council had become a grave embarrassment to this institution, shielding egregious human rights abusers while bashing America and its many friends.Our Ambassador to the United Nations, Nikki Haley, laid out a clear agenda for reform, but despite reported and repeated warnings, no action at all was taken.So the United States took the only responsible course: We withdrew from the Human Rights Council, and we will not return until real reform is enacted.For similar reasons, the United States will provide no support in recognition to the International Criminal Court. As far as America is concerned, the ICC has no jurisdiction, no legitimacy, and no authority. The ICC claims near-universal jurisdiction over the citizens of every country, violating all principles of justice, fairness, and due process. We will never surrender America’s sovereignty to an unelected, unaccountable, global bureaucracy.America is governed by Americans. We reject the ideology of globalism, and we embrace the doctrine of patriotism.Around the world, responsible nations must defend against threats to sovereignty not just from global governance, but also from other, new forms of coercion and domination.In America, we believe strongly in energy security for ourselves and for our allies. We have become the largest energy producer anywhere on the face of the Earth.The United States stands ready to export our abundant, affordable supply of oil, clean coal, and natural gas.OPEC and OPEC nations, are, as usual, ripping off the rest of the world, and I don’t like it. Nobody should like it. We defend many of these nations for nothing, and then they take advantage of us by giving us high oil prices. Not good.We want them to stop raising prices, we want them to start lowering prices, and they must contribute substantially to military protection from now on. We are not going to put up with it—these horrible prices—much longer.Reliance on a single foreign supplier can leave a nation vulnerable to extortion and intimidation. That is why we congratulate European states, such as Poland, for leading the construction of a Baltic pipeline so that nations are not dependent on Russia to meet their energy needs. Germany will become totally dependent on Russian energy if it does not immediately change course.Here in the Western Hemisphere, we are committed to maintaining our independence from the encroachment of expansionist foreign powers.It has been the formal policy of our country since President Monroe that we reject the interference of foreign nations in this hemisphere and in our own affairs. The United States has recently strengthened our laws to better screen foreign investments in our country for national security threats, and we welcome cooperation with countries in this region and around the world that wish to do the same. You need to do it for your own protection.The United States is also working with partners in Latin America to confront threats to sovereignty from uncontrolled migration. Tolerance for human struggling and human smuggling and trafficking is not humane. It’s a horrible thing that’s going on, at levels that nobody has ever seen before. It’s very, very cruel.Illegal immigration funds criminal networks, ruthless gangs, and the flow of deadly drugs. Illegal immigration exploits vulnerable populations, hurts hardworking citizens, and has produced a vicious cycle of crime, violence, and poverty. Only by upholding national borders, destroying criminal gangs, can we break this cycle and establish a real foundation for prosperity.We recognize the right of every nation in this room to set its own immigration policy in accordance with its national interests, just as we ask other countries to respect our own right to do the same—which we are doing. That is one reason the United States will not participate in the new Global Compact on Migration. Migration should not be governed by an international body unaccountable to our own citizens.Ultimately, the only long-term solution to the migration crisis is to help people build more hopeful futures in their home countries. Make their countries great again.Currently, we are witnessing a human tragedy, as an example, in Venezuela. More than 2 million people have fled the anguish inflicted by the socialist Maduro regime and its Cuban sponsors.Not long ago, Venezuela was one of the richest countries on Earth. Today, socialism has bankrupted the oil-rich nation and driven its people into abject poverty.Virtually everywhere socialism or communism has been tried, it has produced suffering, corruption, and decay. Socialism’s thirst for power leads to expansion, incursion, and oppression. All nations of the world should resist socialism and the misery that it brings to everyone.In that spirit, we ask the nations gathered here to join us in calling for the restoration of democracy in Venezuela. Today, we are announcing additional sanctions against the repressive regime, targeting Maduro’s inner circle and close advisors.We are grateful for all the work the United Nations does around the world to help people build better lives for themselves and their families.The United States is the world’s largest giver in the world, by far, of foreign aid. But few give anything to us. That is why we are taking a hard look at U.S. foreign assistance. That will be headed up by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. We will examine what is working, what is not working, and whether the countries who receive our dollars and our protection also have our interests at heart.Moving forward, we are only going to give foreign aid to those who respect us and, frankly, are our friends. And we expect other countries to pay their fair share for the cost of their defense.The United States is committed to making the United Nations more effective and accountable. I have said many times that the United Nations has unlimited potential. As part of our reform effort, I have told our negotiators that the United States will not pay more than 25 percent of the U.N. peacekeeping budget. This will encourage other countries to step up, get involved, and also share in this very large burden.And we are working to shift more of our funding from assessed contributions to voluntary so that we can target American resources to the programs with the best record of success.Only when each of us does our part and contributes our share can we realize the U.N.’s highest aspirations. We must pursue peace without fear, hope without despair, and security without apology.Looking around this hall where so much history has transpired, we think of the many before us who have come here to address the challenges of their nations and of their times. And our thoughts turn to the same question that ran through all their speeches and resolutions, through every word and every hope. It is the question of what kind of world will we leave for our children and what kind of nations they will inherit.The dreams that fill this hall today are as diverse as the people who have stood at this podium, and as varied as the countries represented right here in this body are. It really is something. It really is great, great history.There is India, a free society over a billion people, successfully lifting countless millions out of poverty and into the middle class.There is Saudi Arabia, where King Salman and the Crown Prince are pursuing bold new reforms.There is Israel, proudly celebrating its 70th anniversary as a thriving democracy in the Holy Land.In Poland, a great people are standing up for their independence, their security, and their sovereignty.Many countries are pursuing their own unique visions, building their own hopeful futures, and chasing their own wonderful dreams of destiny, of legacy, and of a home.The whole world is richer, humanity is better, because of this beautiful constellation of nations, each very special, each very unique, and each shining brightly in its part of the world.In each one, we see awesome promise of a people bound together by a shared past and working toward a common future.As for Americans, we know what kind of future we want for ourselves. We know what kind of a nation America must always be.In America, we believe in the majesty of freedom and the dignity of the individual. We believe in self-government and the rule of law. And we prize the culture that sustains our liberty -– a culture built on strong families, deep faith, and fierce independence. We celebrate our heroes, we treasure our traditions, and above all, we love our country.Inside everyone in this great chamber today, and everyone listening all around the globe, there is the heart of a patriot that feels the same powerful love for your nation, the same intense loyalty to your homeland.The passion that burns in the hearts of patriots and the souls of nations has inspired reform and revolution, sacrifice and selflessness, scientific breakthroughs, and magnificent works of art.Our task is not to erase it, but to embrace it. To build with it. To draw on its ancient wisdom. And to find within it the will to make our nations greater, our regions safer, and the world better.To unleash this incredible potential in our people, we must defend the foundations that make it all possible. Sovereign and independent nations are the only vehicle where freedom has ever survived, democracy has ever endured, or peace has ever prospered. And so we must protect our sovereignty and our cherished independence above all.When we do, we will find new avenues for cooperation unfolding before us. We will find new passion for peacemaking rising within us. We will find new purpose, new resolve, and new spirit flourishing all around us, and making this a more beautiful world in which to live.So together, let us choose a future of patriotism, prosperity, and pride. Let us choose peace and freedom over domination and defeat. And let us come here to this place to stand for our people and their nations, forever strong, forever sovereign, forever just, and forever thankful for the grace and the goodness and the glory of God.Thank you. God bless you. And God bless the nations of the world.Thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause.) THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Lee. Thank you, Lee. Thank you.AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: And thank you also to Commander Harman. We’re grateful for your service, for your leadership, and this incredible organization. That’s what it is—it’s incredible. (Applause.)I’m honored to be here today in Kansas City, Missouri, to pay tribute to the men and women who make freedom possible. Kansas City. And what a special place. What a special group of people. The Veterans of Foreign Wars, you people should be very proud of yourselves.I want to personally thank each and every one of you who has served our country in uniform, defended our nation in battle, and protected our great American flag. Thank you. (Applause.)I also want to recognize a great Kansas City legend, who I met today at the plane—somebody that I’ve been a fan of for a long time; a member of the Baseball Hall of Fame—George Brett of the Kansas City Royals. (Applause.) Where’s George? He’s around here someplace. I said, “George, how many years?” “Twenty.” “What was your batting average?” “.305.” I said, that’s pretty good—.305 for 20 years. Special guy.I want to thank a true patriot, your executive director, Bob Wallace, along with your outstanding National Auxiliary President, Dee Guillory. Thank you, Dee. (Applause.)And congratulations to VFW’s incoming leadership, BJ Lawrence and Sandy Kreebull. (Applause.) Where are they? Great. Great. Congratulations.We’re also joined by our brand new VA Secretary, Robert Wilkie—he’s going to be fantastic—who was just confirmed by the Senate last night with an overwhelming vote. The only ones, actually, that voted against him were all of the people, super-lefts, that are running against me in two and a half years. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: Every one of them. If you want to know who’s running, just take a look at Wilkie’s score, because every single one of them—there will be probably quite a few more—but in the Senate, that was it. But what a great vote. And he’s going to do a fantastic job. There’s been nothing more important to me. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you.I also want to thank our Acting VA Secretary, Peter O’Rourke, for doing such a fantastic job in the meantime, holding down the fort until Wilkie got approved. And Peter is going to be joining the whole team, and they are doing numbers, and they are doing a job, with Choice and with all of the other things that we’ve gotten approved. They’re doing some job for our vets. It was a very important commitment that I made to you during the campaign, and we’re fulfilling that commitment.Several terrific members of Congress are here today as well. Great friends of mine; they’ve helped me so much. We’re joined by Kevin Yoder from Kansas. (Applause.) Incredible guy. Kevin? Kevin Yoder. What an incredible guy. And members of Missouri’s congressional delegation: Vicky Hartzler, Billy Long, Jason Smith, along with your state’s Attorney General. Hopefully—we need him so badly—hopefully, your new senator-to-be, Josh Hawley. We need Josh badly. (Applause.) Josh, thank you.In fact, Josh, do me a favor. Come up here just for a second. Just shake my hand. This guy is a special man. Come here, Josh. Come here. (Applause.)HAWLEY: Well, it’s an incredible honor to be here today. Thanks to all of you for your service and what you mean to this country. But how about the leadership of President Donald Trump? What do you think? (Applause.)You know, when I think about President Trump, there’s one word that comes to mind. That word is “courage.” Do you agree? (Applause.) How many people over the years have said that they’ll do this, or they’ll do that? But there’s one guy who had the guts to actually fulfill his promises, the guts to move our embassy to Jerusalem, the guts to actually stand up against our enemies overseas, the guts to put conservatives on the Supreme Court of the United States—and that’s Donald Trump. (Applause.)You know, the President always says—the President always says we’re at a turning-point moment as a country; it’s a critical time for our country. And he’s providing the leadership that this country needs as we lead the world into this new century. And now I tell you what: I think he needs reinforcements in Washington, D.C. Do you agree with that? (Applause.)So let’s do this—let’s show our appreciation again for President Trump and the leadership that he is giving to this country. And let’s redouble our efforts and recommit ourselves to standing together, working hard, and making America great again. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Wow. Goodbye, folks. (Laughter.) That was great. What a great young man.Before going any further, I want to take this moment to send our prayers to the victims of the tragic boat accident that took place in your great state last week. And I have to tell you, the whole world was watching that. We lost 17 beautiful souls, including 9 members of one family, and babies for whom life was just beginning. Their lives were cut short, but they and their loved ones will never, ever be forgotten. A tragedy. We will hold their memory close to our hearts.I want to thank your Governor, Mike Parson—a friend of mine, a great person—for his leadership during this terrible tragedy, along with the Coast Guard and all of the first responders who were incredible. Thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause.)Next year will mark the 120th anniversary of the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the oldest major veterans organization in our country. That’s pretty good, right? (Applause.) For more than a century, the VFW has represented American heroes who promoted American values. And they did so with honor. You are the universal symbol of the patriotic pride that beats loudly in every single American heart.We don’t apologize for America anymore. We stand up for America. (Applause.) We stand up for the patriots who defend America. (Applause.) And we stand up for our National Anthem. (Applause.)We’re putting America first again, and we are seeing the incredible results. We’re destroying the bloodthirsty killers known as ISIS—almost gone. We’re calling the threat by its real name, a name that wasn’t mentioned for a long time. It’s called radical Islamic terrorism. That’s what it is. (Applause.) You have to know your enemy before you can defeat your enemy.Earlier this year, I recognized the true capital of Israel—as Josh said—Jerusalem, where we just opened the American Embassy. (Applause.) They thought it would never be named. And after it was named, they thought it would never get built. And I built it within four months. How about that one? You know that story. Four months. (Applause.) They came to my office; they had a document to be signed. One billion dollars for the embassy. I said, “$1 billion?” They didn’t have a site; they didn’t know anything.And our great Ambassador to Israel called—David Friedman, who’s a very successful lawyer in New York City; one of the most—and he said, “You know, we can do it a lot faster. We have a great site. We have a building already on the site. We could renovate the building quickly, and we could open the embassy, if you’d like to do that, sir.” And I said, “How much would it cost?” He said, “$150,000.” I said, “What?” What? (Applause.) He said, “I think we can do it in four months.”So we’re talking about $1 billion, maybe in 20 years, maybe never. Probably never happens, right? We know what goes on. He starts out, “I’d rather build ships or I’d rather build something else,” if we can save the money. (Applause.) We can save that money; let’s use it wisely.So I said, “David, let’s not do 150, let’s do, like, how about $400,000? And make it nicer.” And it’s beautiful. It just opened, and it is beautiful. So, we’re many years ahead of schedule. And I understand, frankly, every President, for the last many Presidents, have said, “We’re going to open our embassy in Jerusalem.” And then they never did it. They all failed. They never did it. And I understand why.Because when it came time, and when people were hearing rumors about it, I was inundated from calls of every leader from all over the world, imploring me, even demanding that we not do it, to a point where I never took their calls. I called them back after I did it. You know, it’s one of those jobs—(laughter)—“let me call them back.” (Applause.) I was getting calls from kings and presidents and dictators. I was getting a call from everyone. And when I knew what it was about, I’d say, “Tell them I’ll call them next week.” (Laughter.) Then I called them and I said, “Oh, I didn’t know you felt that way. Well, it’s too late.” (Laughter.)But I understand why they didn’t do it, because there was tremendous pressure. We did it. We’re proud of it. It’s there. Enjoy it. (Applause.)And, by the way, the biggest fan may very well be the evangelicals. They wanted that built. They wanted that there. So we’re very—we’re very proud of it. (Applause.)We’ve removed unnecessary restraints on our warfighters in Afghanistan. Those who risk their life and limb for our country, they deserve rules of engagement that give them the best opportunity to finally defeat the enemy. (Applause.) And we’re making—for the first time in years, we’re making a lot of progress in Afghanistan.I withdrew the United States from the horrible one-sided Iran nuclear deal. (Applause.) And Iran is not the same country anymore. That I can say. And we’ll see what happens. But we’re ready to make a real deal, not the deal that was done by the previous administration, which was a disaster. (Applause.)We’re also pursuing the denuclearization of North Korea and a new future of prosperity, security, and peace on the Korean Peninsula and all of Asia. New images, just today, show that North Korea has begun the process of dismantling a key missile site. And we appreciate that. (Applause.) We had a fantastic meeting with Chairman Kim, and it seems to be going very well.I know we are joined today by many incredible veterans of the Korean War. Thank you for your courageous service.As you may know, we’re also working to bring back the remains of your brothers-in-arms who gave their lives in Korea. And I hope that, very soon, these fallen warriors will begin coming home to lay at rest in American soil. That’s starting the process. (Applause.)At the very end of our meeting, I said to Chairman Kim—good relationship, good feeling—I said, “I would really appreciate if you could do that.” He said, “It will be done.” So I was very happy, and I think that process is starting fairly soon, we hope. (Applause.) Because we believe in no American left behind. We believe in that, right? No American left behind. (Applause.)I want to thank the VFW for your devotion to our fallen heroes, unknown soldiers, prisoners of war, and those missing in action, and their families. No one better understands the horrors of war than the people in this room. It is the warrior who bears the scars of battle and who prays most fervently for peace. That is why we remember George Washington’s advice, that the best way to preserve the peace is to be prepared for war. (Applause.)And that is exactly what we do all the time. My thinking is always on military and military strength. That is why I’m proud to report that we are now undertaking the greatest rebuilding of our United States military in its history. (Applause.) We have secured $700 billion for defense this year, and $716 billion next year approved. (Applause.)We’re ordering 147 new F-35 Lightning fighters. This is an incredible plane. It’s stealth; you can’t see it. So when I talk to even people from the other side, they’re trying to order our plane. (Laughter.) They like the fact that you can’t see it. I said, “How would it do in battle with your plane?” They say, “Well, we have one problem: We can’t see your plane.” (Laughter.) That’s a big problem. Stealth. Super Stealth. The best in the world. We make the best military equipment in the world. Also, remember this: jobs. (Applause.)We’re ordering 239 Apache and Black Hawk helicopters. You know what they are. They’re incredible. (Applause.) Nineteen major naval vessels, and nearly 8,000 Humvees. And these will be Humvees that are used by our great soldiers, not handed out to everybody like you’ve been reading about in the past. (Applause.) All made right here in the USA. (Applause.) And we’re adding nearly 30,000 new soldiers, sailors, airmen, and Marines. And I’ve directed the Pentagon to begin the process of creating the sixth branch of our military. It’s called the Space Force. (Applause.)We are living in a different world and we have to be able to adapt. And that’s what it is. A lot of very important things are going to be taking place in space. And I just don’t mean going up to the moon and going up to Mars, where we’ll be going very soon. We’ll be going to Mars very soon. But from a military standpoint, space is becoming every day more and more important.I’m also thrilled to say that we have secured for our military servicemembers and their families the largest—you don’t really want it, you’re too patriotic for this—the largest pay raise in almost a decade. (Applause.) Largest pay raise. You don’t want it. Nah. Anybody willing to give it up for the sake of your country? (Applause.) Okay, keep it. You deserve it. You really do. It’s been a long time since you’ve gotten a raise. You deserve it.My administration is committed to ensuring that our warfighters have the tools, the resources, the firepower that they need to defeat our enemies with overwhelming force. Hopefully we will never have to use the kind of power that I’m building and helping to build for you. Hopefully people will look at us and they’ll say, “Let’s pass. Let’s pass.” (Laughter and applause.)America is a peace-loving nation. We do not seek conflict. But if conflict is forced upon us, we will defend ourselves. And if we must, we will fight and we will do nothing but win. (Applause.) As the great General MacArthur once said, “In war there is no substitute for victory.” Victory.We’re also committed to ensuring that when our warriors return home as veterans, they receive the best care anywhere on Earth. (Applause.) Since taking office, and working alongside of the VFW—and, by the way, your representatives have done an incredible job on helping us with the VA. A complicated subject. So many different things. They help us so much. Because we put in legislation—I said, let’s make sure it’s legislation that’s good and that works, not legislation that’s obsolete before we even get it. If we’re going to fight like hell to get everybody to approve it, let’s get approved what’s good. And we’re enacted some of the largest VA reforms in the history of the VA. (Applause.) Probably the largest.Last year, I signed into the law landmark VA Accountability Act, which nobody thought we could get approved. Nobody. We’re good at getting things approved. (Applause.) Nobody thought.Now, when a bad person—maybe a federal employee, in this case—but somebody bad mistreats or neglects or abuses our great veterans in their time of need, we can turn to them, look at them in the eye, and say, “You’re fired. Get out! Get out!” (Applause.) Before, there was nothing you could do. You had to live with these people. We’ve gotten rid of a lot of people over the last year. Only the bad ones. The good ones we cherish. We cherish the good ones. But we had some bad apples, and they’re gone.As promised, we established the White House VA Hotline, and every VA medical center now offers same-day emergency mental healthcare. Something very important. (Applause.)We’re greatly expanding tele-health and walk-in clinics so our veterans can get anywhere at any time—they can get what they need. They can learn about the problem. And they don’t have to necessarily drive long distances and wait.We are also—it’s been a very big success. (Applause.) We’re also processing veteran disability claims more quickly than ever before, by far. The VA has implemented the Decision Ready Claims process where claims can be completed in under two weeks. We’re striving for one day—but under two weeks. It used to be many, many months. (Applause.)Last year, I signed legislation—it’s amazing, I just said, “last year.” It’s been a long time already, hasn’t it? (Applause.) That was some campaign, wasn’t it? (Applause.) I signed legislation so that veterans can use their GI Bill education benefits at any point in their lifetime. It’s a big difference. (Applause.) They never expire, so vets can get the education they need when it is right for them.And with the VFW’s tremendous help, we passed Veterans Choice—the biggest thing ever. (Applause.) The biggest thing. That’s got to be the biggest improvement you can have. So now, if you can’t get treatment that you need in a timely manner—people used to wait two weeks, three weeks, eight weeks—they couldn’t get to a doctor—you will have the right to see a private doctor immediately and we will pay for it. And you know what? It’s very, very cost effective. And thousands and thousands of lives are going to be saved. And your quality of life is going to be so much better. So you don’t have to wait online for two and a half weeks to see a doctor, like in the past. Veterans Choice has been passed. (Applause.)And my administration also understands that we cannot be a safe country if we are not a prosperous country. We have to think of ourselves. You have to see these trade deals I’m working on; they’re a disaster. We’re losing hundreds of billions of dollars with individual countries a year. And they’re sticking—you got to stick it out. You got to just—we got to fight it. Nobody else fought it.I went to some of the countries, I said, “How did it get so imbalanced?” They said, “Nobody ever called.” (Laughter.) They said, “Nobody ever called.” They’d do whatever they wanted and we’d just put up with it. Not any longer folks. Not any longer. (Applause.) We’re making tremendous progress. They’re all coming. They don’t want to have those tariffs put on them. They’re all coming to see us. And the farmers will be the biggest beneficiary. (Applause.) Watch. We’re opening up markets. You watch what’s going to happen. Just be a little patient.They’re all aiming at anybody that likes me. And they have lobbyists like nobody has ever seen. They have the best lobbyists ever put together. I was hearing and reading that they have some of the greatest lobbying teams ever put together. “You’ve got to stop the President from putting tariffs on these countries and these companies that are ripping off the United States. You’ve got to stop him.” Just remember, we’re going to do something that, honestly, nobody else could do. Nobody else could do. We have a lot of —AUDIENCE MEMBER: (Inaudible.)THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, darling. (Laughter.) I like you too. I like her. Thank you very much. That was good timing. (Laughter.)We’re now in the midst of a great economic revival. And it’s for that reason that I chose—this is the time. Last year, our country lost 817 billion—with a “B”—dollars on trade. We lost $817 billion. And people say, “Oh, could you do it this week? Could you get it done immediately?” These countries have been ripping us off for decades. It doesn’t take a week. It takes a little longer. But we’re going to get it done. But just remember, we can’t lose $817 billion.We rebuilt China. What the European Union is doing to us is incredible. How bad. They made a $151 billion last year—our trade deficit with the European Union. They sound nice but they’re rough. They’re all coming in to see me tomorrow. They’re all coming to the White House.I said, “You have to change.” They didn’t want to change. I said, “Okay. Good. We’re going to tariff your cars.” They send millions of cars—Mercedes, all of them, BMW. So many cars. I said, “We’re going to have to tariff your cars.” They said, “When can we show up? When can we be there?” (Laughter.) “Would tomorrow be okay?” Oh, folks, stick with us. Stick with us. (Applause.) Amazing.But remember, they have the biggest, best, strongest lobbyists, and they’re doing a number. Just stick with us. Don’t believe the crap you see from these people—the fake news. (Applause.)I mean, I saw a piece on NBC today. NBC—not just CNN. CNN is the worst. (Laughter.) But I saw a piece on NBC; it was heart-throbbing. They were interviewing people—they probably go through 20, and then they pick the one that sounds like the worst. But they went through a group of people. In fact, I wanted to say, “I got to do something about this Trump.” (Laughter.) Terrible.And that piece was done by the lobbyists and by the people that they hire. It was a total setup. This country is doing better than it’s ever done before, economically. This is the time to take off the rip-off of tariff. We have to do it. (Applause.)You know, other countries have tariffs on us. So when I say, “Well, I’m going to put tariffs on them, they all start screaming, ‘He’s using tariffs.'” China charges us, when we make a car, a 25 percent tariff. We charge them 2.5 percent. Other than that, it’s a fair deal. Okay? (Laughter.)Similar things with other countries, like the European Union. They’re a big abuser. But it’s all working out. And just remember: What you’re seeing and what you’re reading is not what’s happening. And I’ll tell you, I have so many people that are so in favor—because we have to make our country truly great again.Remember? “Make America Great Again.” And then, in two and a half years, it’s called, “Keep America Great.” So the way we keep America great is to make at least reasonable—I’m not saying—at least reasonable, at least fair trade deals. Not stupid trade deals, like we’ve put up with for 25 years. So we’re changing it, and we’re changing it rapidly. (Applause.)Over the last little more than a year and a half, we’ve created 3.7 million jobs since election. African American, Hispanic, and Asian American unemployment has reached the lowest levels ever recorded in our country’s history—the lowest levels. Unemployment—lowest level. (Applause.)Remember, I used to say—I said it here: “What do you have to lose?” I was right. Women’s unemployment recently achieved a 65-year low. Lowest in 65 years. (Applause.)You’ll like this one. Veterans’ unemployment has fallen to the lowest level in almost 18 years. We’re working to make it better. I’m sorry. You know, “18 years” isn’t so good when you hear “history” and “65 years.” (Applause.) Eighteen years. And I’ll guarantee, within a month or two months, that 18 will be even a much higher number. We take great care of our vets.Consumer, business, and manufacturing confidence has reached its all-time highs. Confidence is all-time high.We’ve cut a record number of job-killing regulations. No President, no matter how long they’ve been in office—even though we’re only here for a short time—has cut anywhere near the regulations. And these are unnecessary. These are waste regulations. It would take 20 years to get approval to build a highway. We’re trying to bring it down to one year. We have it down to about two. We’re trying to get it down to one.And if it doesn’t work, or if it’s environmentally unsound, or there’s something wrong, we’re not going approve it. But we’re not going to take a process 20, 21 years, and then raise your hand that it’s not approved. We’ll let you know in a period of a year or maybe two. Right now, it’s at two; we’re trying to bring it down to one.We passed the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. Biggest in history. (Applause.)And unfortunately, we had tremendous opposition for lowering your taxes from Claire McCaskill. She voted against. Unbelievable.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: Unbelievable. And she wants to now end it so that you pay more. You figure this one out. I don’t know—is that good? You figure that one out.In the first quarter of this year alone, American companies repatriated a record of nearly $300 billion—this is in the first quarter. And it’s coming back into our country, with our companies, and our employment, and building plants, and factories, and headquarters in our country, where it belongs. (Applause.)We think the number—and this is all because of our tax reform and tax cuts—we think the number will be close to $4 trillion, coming back into our country—money that would never have been seen by you, or us, or me. (Applause.)And just like I promised, we are confronting the unfair trade deals, and we are doing it like nobody has ever done, because our workers have been cheated, our companies have been cheated. They’ve stolen our wealth. They’ve brought it to other countries. As you know, I campaigned on that issue; it’s very close to my heart. I understand that issue better than anybody.I don’t like it when they close a factory in your state, or a plant in your great state, and they move it to another country, and they make the product. They fire all of you, and they make the product, and they send it back into our country to be sold tax-free. I don’t like that. I don’t like that. (Applause.) We’re stopping it. We’re stopping it.Because companies are moving back into our country like never before. You saw Chrysler announce, many are announcing. Japan has just announced two big companies are opening up…in Michigan. We have a lot of companies coming back into our country. You haven’t seen that for 25 years. You haven’t seen it. (Applause.)And we need workers. Because our unemployment rate at 3.8 percent is so low—now we’re taking people off the rolls, and we’re training people, but we need workers. And that’s why I want people coming in. You know, people don’t say this, and they certainly don’t report it, but I want people coming into our country, but I want them coming in based on merit. I want the merit system, so they can help us. (Applause.) Merit.The forgotten men and women of our country are forgotten no more. The Democrats are trying to find out, “Who are these people that came out to vote? Where did they come from?” Remember that? “Where did they come from?” Now they know, but they’re not going to the Democrats who are going so far left that nobody can believe it. They want open borders, and crime is okay. We want strong borders and we want no crime. Other than that, we’re very similar. (Applause.) Other than that, we’re very similar.We also know that to be a strong nation, we have to have these strong borders. We cannot send our military to confront threats abroad, only to allow those same threats to cross our borders and to threaten us right here at home. (Applause.) We help other countries protect their borders, and we don’t protect our own borders. How about that?We’re fighting every day to secure our borders, and we’re doing a great job. But we’re not given the tools. We have the worst laws in any country, ever, in history. We have catch-and release. You catch them, and now we say, “Give me your name. Oh, good—come back in a couple of years. We’ll take you to court. You’re released.” This is—these are—this is the policy of fools. Catch-and-release. You catch even a criminal, you catch a bad person, you release the person as soon as you catch them. We have to end it. Despite that, we’re doing a great job.And ICE—ICE. Oh, ICE. Thank goodness for ICE. (Applause.) Because we have some of the worst drug dealers, terrorists, criminals, and MS-13 gang members—and we’re either throwing them the hell in jail, or throwing them out of our country. And ICE goes up there, and they walk in like it’s another day in the office. Thank goodness for ICE. (Applause.)The Democrats want to abandon ICE. They want to end ICE. They’re too strong. I saw one of the people get—they’re too strong. They’re too strong. I think MS-13 is strong, too. (Laughter.) The only thing they understand is strength. They don’t understand anything but strength. And ICE is tough and smart, and they track them down, and they stop tremendous amounts of crime. And these are great people, and they’re not being treated properly. (Applause.)And the fact is, instead of supporting our ICE officers, many of these Democrat politicians who are, really, disciples of a very low IQ person, Maxine Waters —AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT:—and perhaps even worse, Nancy Pelosi —AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT:—they’ve launched vicious smears on the brave men and women who defend our communities. ICE officers work in dangerous conditions to protect our communities. And more than a third of ICE officers happen to be veterans themselves. About a third. (Applause.) But Democratic politicians want to abolish ICE. They want to see open borders. Can you imagine?You know, every once in a while you’ll hear something, and usually you understand. Like in deal-making, you always have to understand the other side. When you hear “open borders,” when you hear “get rid of ICE,” when you hear some of the things that they’re proposing, it’s like you can’t even understand it. Can you imagine, open borders, you’d have millions of people pouring into our country. Millions and millions of people. Many people that you don’t want in our country. But you would have millions of people pouring into our country. The crime would be unbelievable.And they want to get rid of the crime fighter, on top of everything else. “Open the border and get rid of your crime fighters.” You don’t understand it. Nobody understands it. But I hope they keep it up, because we’re going to have a lot of fun in four months, and we’re going to have a lot of fun in 2020 running against that. (Applause.)My administration will always stand proudly with the heroes of ICE and Border Patrol. They’re all heroes. And I want them to know that we thank them. (Applause.)The Veterans of Foreign Wars understand better than anyone the importance of honoring those who put service to their fellow citizens before they put service to themselves. That’s both at home and abroad. (Applause.)Here with us today is an extraordinary man who embodies the highest ideals of loyalty, patriotism, and service. He is a World War II veteran from the great state of Pennsylvania. That’s another one we won. (Applause.) We won you guys by 20 points. Of course, I’m not going to bring that up. (Laughter.) I’m not going to tell that to George Brett. Twenty points. Many of you know him well; he’s a lifelong member of the VFW—Sergeant Allen Jones. Where’s Allen? Where’s Allen? (Applause.) Sergeant. Should we bring him up?AUDIENCE: Yeah! (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Come on, Allen. Come on. (Applause.)He’s only 94, and the Secret Service made him walk about 100 yards out of his way, but that’s okay. (Laughter.) That’s okay. (Applause.)JONES: I just—thank you. This is one of the highlights of this 94-year-old man. I just want to tell you a few things. May I?THE PRESIDENT: Yes.JONES: Mr. President —(Laughter.)THE PRESIDENT: I’ve got time.JONES: I had four brothers serve in World War II. My oldest brother was lost off the coast of Italy. Many times, I just wish that he could come back to the Land of the Free and the Home of Brave again. (Applause.)I’ve given to the Veterans of Foreign Wars 70 years of my life. (Applause.) Thank you. My wife is with me today, but she’s not here. She’s not feeling well. And my children are watching me today, hopefully—(laughter)—to know that their dad got to stand beside the President of the United States—(applause)—with the President.Mr. President, I want to ask you something. (Laughter.) I’ve been told that I could never enter the Oval Office in Washington, D.C. I’m going to be 95 years of age April 11th of next year. Hopefully, that you will allow me to bring my family into the Oval Office —THE PRESIDENT: Yes.JONES:—to meet you. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Anytime you want. Anytime.JONES: One last thing, Mr. President. (Laughter.) I want to tell you, Mr. President, this group knows not to give the mic to Allen Q. Jones when he’s at a state convention or the national convention. (Laughter.)I asked you to autograph this picture personally, because this was taken to you—with you when you were running for election —THE PRESIDENT: That’s right.JONES:—as a President of the United States.THE PRESIDENT: Oh, it’s beautiful. Thank you. Beautiful. Wow. Let me have—(laughter and applause). I have a good one here, Allen. That’s so beautiful. (Applause.)Going to stay up here. Okay, I got to do this. You got it. Thank you, Allen. Thank you.JONES: God bless you, Mr. President. and I wish you well in the future. (Applause.) Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: I started to get a little bit concerned when he was finishing. (Laughter.) Well, this is a President that will have you in the Oval Office. So all of my people back there, they’re working it out already. Okay? (Applause.) With honor.And we pay tribute not only to Allen, but to all of the heroes of the Greatest Generation. (Applause.) And I’d like to take this moment to recognize every World War II veteran in the audience today. Each of you is a national treasure. It’s true. (Applause.)We will never forget what you did for us—ever. From Bunker Hill to Belleau Wood, from Iwo Jima to the Inchon Landing, Americans have stormed into danger, stared down evil, and stood strong and tall for God, country, and freedom. (Applause.)Anytime we see an American in uniform from the Army, Navy, Marines, Air Force, or Coast Guard, our hearts swell with pride. And anywhere those uniforms appear, our enemies tremble with fear because they know there is no greater force for peace and justice than the United States military. (Applause.)To every single member of the VFW, because of your service, your courage, and your example, we are restoring the dreams and the glory, and the greatness of America. We will never give in. We will never give up. And we will never stop fighting for our country, our flag, and our freedom. (Applause.)Together we will keep on fighting and we will keep on winning as one people, one family, and one nation under God. Thank you. God bless you. (Applause.) God bless our veterans. And God bless the United States of America. (Applause.) Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you to our First Lady, Melania, who has been so incredible. (Applause.) Thank you. And we are blessed to have you as our First Lady. Really are.It’s great to be back in the beautiful state of New Hampshire. (Applause.) I don’t know if you remember, but this is the first place I came for the primaries. (Applause.) And this is the room right here. So I like this room. This has been a good room.We’re honored to be joined by your wonderful and very talented Governor, Chris Sununu. Chris, thank you. (Applause.) Thank you, Chris. Oh, and there’s another talented governor. Governor Sununu, stand up. (Applause.) I have to tell you, there was nobody tougher on Trump at the beginning. (Laughter.) It’s true. There was nobody on television tougher. And then we met each other and we liked each other, and he went from the worst to the best. Governor, thank you. (Laughs.) I mean that, too. Thank you.I want to thank also Attorney General Sessions, and Secretary—thank you, Jeff.—(applause)—Secretary Azar, Secretary Nielsen, and Surgeon General Adams for joining us at this very important event.The First Lady and I just visited the Manchester Fire Department Safe Station. Talking about it all over the country. The Fire Chief, Dan Goonan, and all of the first responders with us today, thank you. You’ve been incredible, and you’re saving American lives.We’re also joined by a number of law enforcement officers who we love. Our police, DEA, ICE, Border Patrol agents, and Customs officers work night and day to keep drugs out of our communities and criminals off of our streets. (Applause.) So today, we thank you, we honor you, and we want you to know that we will always have your backs 100 percent. Thank you very much, law enforcement. Thank you. (Applause.)I especially want to acknowledge all of the families with us today who have endured terrible hardships because of the opioid crisis, and especially those who have lost precious loved ones. I’ve been saying this for a long time, and it all started right here in New Hampshire, because I see what you’re going through. About as bad as there is anywhere in the country. And I said I’d be back, and we are back. And we’re pouring a lot of money and a lot of talent into this horrible problem. And we pledge to honor the memory of those you lost with action and determination and resolve. We’ll get it. We will not rest until the end. And I will tell you, this scourge of drug addiction in America will stop. It will stop. (Applause.)Every day, 116 Americans die from an opioid-related overdose. In New Hampshire, the overdose, really, death rate—I mean, can you believe this? The death rate is double the national average. It’s got difficulties like people wouldn’t believe.Defeating this epidemic will require the commitment of every state, local, and federal agency. Failure is not an option. Addiction is not our future. We will liberate our country from this crisis. Never been like this. Hundreds of years—never been like this. And we will raise a drug-free generation of American children.Last October, we declared the opioid crisis a public health emergency. Should have been done a long time before. Since then, we’ve worked with Congress to ensure at least 6 billion additional dollars, going through right now, in new funding in 2018 and 2019 to combat the opioid crisis. And we will be spending the most money ever on the opioid crisis. (Applause.)On our most recent National Prescription Drug Take Back Day, people across the country turned in more than 900,000 pounds of unused or expired prescription drugs—more than the weight of three Boeing 757s.Our Customs and Border Protection—and these people, the job they do is incredible—seized nearly 1,500 pounds of fentanyl last year, nearly three times the amount seized in 2016. And I told China: Don’t send it. (Applause.) And I told Mexico: Don’t send it. Don’t send it.In 2017, ICE arrested criminal aliens with 76,000 charges and convictions for dangerous drug crimes.Last year, the Department of Justice prosecuted more than 3,000 defendants in cases involving opioid, all of the trafficking, and the related crimes—3,000 cases—including a pharmacist, a physician’s assistant, and an opioid trafficker, each charged with committing serious drug crimes in New Hampshire.Whether you are a dealer or doctor or trafficker or a manufacturer, if you break the law and illegally peddle these deadly poisons, we will find you, we will arrest you, and we will hold you accountable. (Applause.) Thank you.Here in New Hampshire, I applaud all of the Drug Enforcement Agents and law enforcement officers who recently coordinated Operation Granite Shield, an 18-hour enforcement action targeting drug traffickers that resulted in the arrest of 151 people. These are terrible people, and we have to get tough on those people, because we can have all the Blue Ribbon committees we want, but if we don’t get tough on the drug dealers, we’re wasting our time. Just remember that. We’re wasting our time. And that toughness includes the death penalty. (Applause.)You know, it’s an amazing thing. Some of these drug dealers will kill thousands of people during their lifetime—thousands of people—and destroy many more lives than that. But they will kill thousands of people during their lifetime, and they’ll get caught and they’ll get 30 days in jail. Or they’ll go away for a year, or they’ll be fined. And yet, if you kill one person, you get the death penalty or you go to jail for life.So if we’re not going to get tough on the drug dealers who kills thousands of people and destroy so many people’s lives, we are just doing the wrong thing. We have got to get tough. This isn’t about nice anymore. This isn’t about committees. This isn’t about let’s get everybody and have dinners, and let’s have everybody go to a Blue Ribbon committee and everybody gets a medal for, frankly, talking and doing nothing. This is about winning a very, very tough problem. And if we don’t get very tough on these dealers, it’s not going to happen, folks. It’s not going to happen. And I want to win this battle.I don’t want to leave at the end of seven years and have this problem, okay? (Applause.) I don’t want that. Right? Thank you. Not going to happen. Thank you all. A lot of voters in this room. I see that. Thank you. (Applause.) No, we’re going to solve this problem. We’re going to solve it with brains, we’re going to solve it with resolve, and we’re going to solve it with toughness. Because toughness is the thing that they most fear. That’s what they most fear.So to the brave agents and officers, thank you for protecting us all.Last year, my commission on combatting the incredible crisis of opioids issued 56 recommendations. My administration agreed with all of the commission’s goals, and we’ve worked aggressively to put them into action.Today, I’m here to announce additional steps that we’re taking as part of our nationwide initiative to address the opioid crisis, and, by the way, the drug crisis—the general drug crisis.First, we’re taking action to reduce drug demand by preventing Americans from becoming addicted in the first place. So important. That includes increasing federal funding for the development of non-addictive painkillers. And we have to come up with a solution where we come up with a painkiller that’s not so addictive. And we can do it. We’re not that far off. We can do it. These things are incredibly addictive. So we’re going to find that answer also.Here with us today are Jim and Jean Mozer. They lost their beautiful son, Adam, to a fentanyl overdose. His addiction began with prescription pills he found in their kitchen cabinet. They have since begun the Zero Left initiative to help families get rid of excess painkillers. Jim and Jean, we’re sorry for your loss—a great boy; he’s a great boy—and we applaud your strength and your leadership. And where are you? Where are you? Come on up. Come on up here. Come on up here. (Applause.) Tell us about your boy.MS. MOZER: Adam was our oldest son. He was a great kid. He was a smart kid. Grew up out in rural East Kingston, New Hampshire. He had a degree in actuarial science, which, as many of you know, that’s the science of forecasting risk.He was the kind of kid that made you feel really good about yourself. You give him five minutes; you really liked him. And, you know, he just made a bad choice one night. As smart as he was, he found his way into our kitchen cabinet. And, sadly, the rest is history. He got hooked on it, and had to go to the street eventually. And he found fentanyl.And he’s been gone for two-and-a-half years, and we miss him every day. Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, darling. You take care of yourself. Okay?MS. MOZER: Thank you.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you. Thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you. Appreciate it. And so many cases like that.We’re also taking action to prevent addiction by addressing the problem of overprescribing. (Applause.) And our Department of Justice is looking very seriously into bringing major litigation against some of these drug companies. We’ll bring it at a federal level. (Applause.) Some states are already bringing it, but we’re thinking about bringing it at a very high federal level. And we’ll do a job.We’re going to cut nationwide opioid prescriptions by one-third over the next three years. We’re also going to make sure that virtually all prescriptions reimbursed by the federal government follow best practices for prescribing. We’ll ensure that opioid addiction is not subsidized by the American taxpayer. (Applause.)The best way—so important—and the best way to beat the drug crisis is to keep people from getting hooked on drugs to begin with. As part of that effort—(applause)—so important. And this has been something that I’ve been very strongly in favor of: spending a lot of money on great commercials showing how bad it is, so that kids seeing those commercials during the right shows on television or wherever—the Internet—when they see these commercials they—“I don’t want any part of it.” That’s the least expensive thing we can do, where you scare them from ending up like the people in the commercials. And we’ll make them very, very bad commercials. We’ll make them pretty unsavory situations. And you’ve seen it before, and it’s had an impact on smoking and cigarettes. You see what happens to the body; you see what happens to the mind.So we’re announcing a new website, CrisisNextDoor.gov, where Americans can share their stories about the danger of the opioid addiction and addictions.But we’re thinking about doing, really, a largescale rollout of commercials that show how bad it is for the kids. And when they see those commercials, hopefully, they’re not going to be going to drugs of any kind—drugs of any kind. And we’ll save a lot of lives, and we’ll make their life a lot easier.This epidemic can affect anyone, and that’s why we want to educate everyone.The second part of our initiative is to reduce the supply of illicit drugs. Ninety percent of the heroin in America comes from our southern border, where, eventually, the Democrats will agree with us and we’ll build the wall to keep the damn drugs out. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: Build that wall! Build that wall! Build that wall!THE PRESIDENT: It’s pretty amazing. They don’t want to go with DACA, because they don’t care about DACA. But they’re trying to tie the wall to DACA, and DACA to the wall. And they want to keep DACA for the campaign instead of getting it approved, which we could do very easily. The Republicans are totally in favor of doing something substantial for DACA. But the Democrats like it as a campaign issue, so they don’t get it approved. And they want to tie it to the wall, which is okay with me. But both should get approved. They don’t want it to be approved. Remember what I said: They don’t want it to be approved. They want to make it part of the campaign. Well, we’ll make it part of the campaign, also. And we’ll win, because we’re going to win on those issues. (Applause.)My administration is also confronting things called “sanctuary cities” that shield dangerous criminals. And every day, sanctuary cities release illegal immigrants and drug dealers, traffickers, and gang members back into our communities. They’re protected by these cities. And you say, “What are they doing?” They’re safe havens for just some terrible people. Some terrible people. And they’re making it very dangerous for our law enforcement officers. You see it all the time.As the people of New Hampshire have learned firsthand, ending sanctuary cities is crucial to stopping the drug addiction crisis. And your governor, who is great—the numbers are going down in New Hampshire. I don’t know if you’ve seen it, but the numbers are going down. Chris, we were just—stand up, Chris. (Applause.) It’s really one of the few bright spots where the numbers actually are going down, and that’s a tremendous achievement. Thank you, Chris. (Applause.)According to a recent Dartmouth study, the sanctuary city of Lawrence, Massachusetts is one of the primary sources of fentanyl in six New Hampshire counties. ICE recently arrested 15 MS-13 gang members—these are not good people, folks. Okay? These are bad, bad people. They don’t use guns. They’d rather use knives because it’s more painful and it takes longer. These are bad people—in Boston, Massachusetts, which is a place where you have sanctuary cities.I’m repeating my call on Congress to block funds for sanctuary cities and to close the deadly loopholes that allow criminals back into our country and into our country in the first place. (Applause.)You know, some things are very understandable. We have lots of issues where we’re on both sides of an issue, and you can understand the other side even though you don’t agree. Sanctuary cities are hard to understand for people because they don’t get it. They don’t get it. You see what’s going on in California, how terrible it is, how dangerous it is. And they’re all trying to protect sanctuary cities.And whether it’s Kate Steinle or so many others, they’d be around today if these people weren’t allowed back into our country through, in this case, the southern border, at least five times. And look at the damage, and then look at this verdict. Look at the verdict. Can you believe the verdict?So we have to get a lot smarter. We have to get a lot tougher. And speaking of tough, because here with us today is ICE Agent Derek Dunn. Derek worked with state police to uncover a major drug smuggling operation in Lawrence, Massachusetts. (Applause.) Where’s Derek? Derek. Where’s Derek? Come here, Derek. I love tough guys. We need tough guys. Come here, Derek. (Applause.)AGENT DUNN: Just want to say thanks for everyone being here. And it’s been a battle. It’s been an absolute battle for our counterparts here at DEA and FBI and everybody—all the law enforcement, state police, and the local police. It’s been an absolute battle. We all work together, and we’re going to get this solved. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Thank you. He didn’t know he was going to do that. (Laughter.) And you didn’t know you were going to do that. But that’s in honor of your boy, right? You made a big impact.I also want to mention ICE Agent Ron Morin and Manchester Police Detective Patrick Maguire. They helped lead the team that arrested a terrible human trafficker who used opioids to harm, in a very violent way, his victims. Thank you both for bringing the trafficker to a very strong and swift justice.Where are you guys? Thank you. (Applause.) Stand up, fellas. Thank you. Thank you.We’re also shutting down illegal online marketplaces and preventing drugs that come from China and other countries from bypassing our borders. And we’re getting very tough on it. It’s not that we have a choice. We don’t have a choice. We can be nice, and we can be soft and weak, and you’re not going to have a country left. So we have to strengthen up, and strengthen up our laws so that we can do what we have to do. We have to stop this from happening.Drug traffickers kill so many thousands of our citizens every year. And that’s why my Department of Justice will be seeking so many much tougher penalties than we’ve ever had, and we will be focusing on the penalty that I talked about previously for the big pushers, the ones that are really killing so many people. And that penalty is going to be the death penalty. (Applause.)If you look at—if you look at other countries—I’ve gotten to know the leaders of many countries. And I won’t mention names, but you know the countries I’m talking about. I go around, “How is your drug problem?” “We don’t have much of a drug problem.” “What do you mean you don’t have a drug problem?” “Well, we don’t have.” I say, how come? “We have zero tolerance for drug dealers.” I said, “What does that mean?” “That means we have the death penalty for drug dealers. We don’t have a drug problem.”Take a look at some of these countries where they don’t play games. They don’t have a drug problem. We have court cases that last 10 years, and then they get out at the end. We got to be tough. We have to be smart. We have to change the laws, and we’re working on that right now. The Department of Justice is working very, very hard on that.But the ultimate penalty has to be the death penalty. Now, maybe our country is not ready for that. It’s possible—it’s possible that our country is not ready for that. And I can understand it, maybe. Although, personally, I can’t understand that. But there are people that are good people, that are strong, smart people, and they would differ with most of us. But I think unless you do that, unless you have really, really powerful penalties, led by the death penalty for the really bad pushers and abusers, we are going to get nowhere. And I’m telling you, we are going to get somewhere.Companies must also be held accountable. The Department of Justice recently created a task force to coordinate investigations and lawsuits against manufacturers and other bad actors that harm our citizens.And I can tell you that Jeff Sessions, who’s here with us now, feels so strongly about this. And they’re working very hard and very effectively on that, and so we appreciate that very much. Thank you. Thank you, Jeff. (Applause.) Thank you.I can think of nothing more important. The third part of our initiative is to get lifesaving help to those who need it. We’re going to make sure our first responders have access to lifesaving overdose-reversing drugs—which, by the way, are amazing.Here with us today is Mike Kelly, the president of Adapt Pharma. Adapt Pharma makes an overdose-reversing drug for opioids, which I’ve watched and seen work. It’s called Narcan. It’s actually incredible. Today, we applaud Adapt Pharma’s decision to provide free—free—Narcan to all high schools, colleges, and universities in America.I’d like you to come up, Mike. Come up. (Applause.) Where’s Mike? Come up, Mike. That’s really an amazing and generous offer. Thank you.Tell us a little bit about that, Mike. Please.MR. KELLY: So, Adapt is a small company that has a big job, which is to reverse overdoses. And we’ve provided, free of charge, four boxes to all colleges and universities in the United States; two boxes free for every high school in the United States; as well as educational awareness for the nursing departments, as well as the faculty to train and teach everybody about the dangers of opioids and the risks, and also the benefits of having Narcan nasal spray near where opioids are.THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much.MR. KELLY: Thank you. Appreciate it. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Mike. It’s amazing, generous. And I’ve watched the police and the fire—they come around and they’ve become so good at it. But I’ve seen people that are just about dead wake up.Now, the problem is, they then go back, in many cases, to the drugs, and they do it again and again and again. But we have to work on that. We have to work on that very, very strongly.I also want to recommend and commend a Richmond-based company, Kaléo, for donating more than 300,000 doses of their overdose-reversing drug to first responders, which has already saved more than 5,000 lives in a very short period of time.My administration has made clear that medical providers can share crucial information with family members about an overdose so that their loved ones can help them get into treatment. We need treatment.We’re making medically assisted treatment more available and affordable, and we continue to increase competition and drive down drug prices. And we’re driving them down. We’re going to have a major news conference, probably at the White House, in about a month, because all of you people—and I’m talking about prescription drugs, not necessarily the drugs that we’re talking about here. But we pay, as a country, so much more for drugs because of the drug lobbies and other reasons, and the complexity of distribution, which is basically another term for saying, “How do we get more money?”And if you compare our drug prices to other countries in the world, in some cases it’s many times higher for the exact same pill, or whatever it is, in the exact same package, made in the exact same plant. And we’re going to change that.And I would like to ask Secretary Azar just to come up and mention opioid, but also talk about how we’re getting your drug prices down. And we’ve already saved billions of dollars for our country, and it’s reflected in much lower drug prices. Watch what’s going to happen over a short period of time. This man is one of the great professionals, ran an incredibly successful drug company. Who knows better than the guy running the drug company, Eli Lilly? That’s your company, right? Or was.SECRETARY AZAR: It was.THE PRESIDENT: Now you’re on the other side, though. So nobody knows better. The most respected man in that industry—and we got him to work, because he loves our country.Would you tell them a little bit about what you have planned for drug prices and also opioids, in terms of stoppage? Please. Secretary. (Applause.)SECRETARY AZAR: Well, thank you, Mr. President. And, you know, you’ve done a lot already to tackle this issue of drug pricing. So, last year, the FDA approved more generic drugs than it ever has in its history. And that brings prices down for patients, for the system, for everybody. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Great.SECRETARY AZAR: You also changed the rules so our senior citizens pay less out of pocket for their drugs. That’s $3.2 billion that they’re paying less out of pocket for their drugs when they go to the pharmacy. (Applause.)And then, we’re going to be rolling out, as you mentioned, in about a month, a whole slate of other proposals around how we decrease the price of drugs and how we bring discounts that the middlemen right now are getting; how those will go to our patients, to individuals.Now we’re attacking this with the same level of action, determination, and resolve that you’re bring to the opioid crisis. And that’s where we’re focused on prevention and getting that one-third fewer illegal opioid prescriptions to our people. The second is the stopping the illicit flow of these opioids into our country. And the third is compassionate treatment for people—evidence-based, science-based, compassionate treatment—that can help people recover and stay away from relapse.So, thank you, Mr. President, for your leadership. (Applause.)THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Alex. You’ll be seeing drug prices falling very substantially in the not-too-distant future, and it’s going to be beautiful.And I want to thank, also, Scott Gottlieb. Scott is working on different things, but one of them is called “Right to Try.” Do you know what “Right to Try” is? These are for people that are terminally ill. And there are very, very good-looking combinations of things, or pills, medicines, potential cures. And they’re terminal, and they’re not going to be living much longer. And we don’t have the right to give them these experimental drugs or these early-stage drugs that really show promise, for whatever reason. But they say because they don’t want to harm somebody, if you can believe it. They don’t want to harm. So the people will oftentimes go to foreign lands, foreign countries. They’ll do anything. They want hope. They want hope. “Right to Try.”So we’re working with Congressman Greg Walden and numerous other senators and congressmen. And I think we’re going to have good luck. The Democrats have been pushing back on it, but I think many of them are also coming along. It’s called “Right to Try.” A patient is terminal. There’s good progress made with a certain drug. We’re going to make it possible for that patient to get that drug. And maybe it’s going to work. It’s hope. It’s incredible; they’ve been talking about this for years and years and years. We’re going to get it approved. So important. All right? (Applause.)To further expand treatment, I’m also calling on Congress to change the restrictive 1970s-era law that prevents Medicaid from paying for care at certain treatment facilities with more than 16 beds. It’s such an important factor.In the meantime, my administration is granting waivers to states so they can help people who need treatment now, Governor.We’re also going to help inmates leaving prison get treatment so they can have a second chance to become productive, law-abiding citizens. And what we’ve really done for the inmates—you know, it’s very hard for them to get out of jail and get a job.What we’ve really done for them—better than anything we can sign, any legislation that we can pass demanding that you hire—we’re getting a great economy. It hasn’t been this good in many, many years. Some people say it’s never been this good.And what’s happened is, as you see, unemployment is way down, and people are starting to hire inmates. And the results are incredible. Some of these employers are calling up, saying, “Wow, what great people.” We’re giving them a second chance. It’s very, very important. So the tremendous economy is helping us very much with that program.We want every American—(applause)—thank you. We want every American to be able to be able to reach their full God-given potential. And we will succeed together as one people, one nation, and one great American family. Because Americans never give in, and we never, ever give up. This group never gives up, right? Never give up. Your boy. (Applause.)The brave families here today remind us that the strength of America is found in the heart of our people. We see America’s heart in the parents who won’t accept addiction as the fate of their children. And if something horrible has befallen that family, they go around and they want to make sure it never happens to another family. And that’s why we thank you so much, and we thank your boy. (Applause.) He did not die in vain.We see it in sons and daughters who cheer on moms and dads as they recover. We see it in the doctors and nurses who provide constant and loving care. We see it in the heroic law enforcement officers who race into unimaginable danger. We see it in EMTs and firefighters who act so quickly to save so many lives. And we see this American heart in the men and women who fight every day to help rescue their fellow citizens from the grips of addiction.These are the courageous souls who remind us that, for America, there is nothing beyond our reach. Nothing at all. (Applause.) Nothing.We will defeat this crisis, we will protect our beautiful children, and we will ensure that tomorrow is better, brighter, stronger, and greater than ever before. Because as long as we have trust in our citizens, pride in our country, and faith in our God, we will not fail. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause.) Thank you very much. Thank you very much.Together, we will end the scourge of drug addiction in America once and for all. We will win. We will beat it. We’ll be tough. We’ll be smart. We’ll be kind. We’ll be loving. We’ll do whatever we have to do. But we’re going to win.Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America. (Applause.) Thank you very much. Thank you. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Thank you everybody. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you, Matt, for that great introduction. And thank you for this big crowd. This is incredible. Really incredible. (Applause.)We’ve all come a long way together. We’ve come a long way together. I’m thrilled to be back at CPAC, with so many of my wonderful friends and amazing supporters, and proud conservatives. (Applause.) Remember when I first started running? Because I wasn’t a politician, fortunately. But do you remember I started running and people would say, “Are you sure he’s a conservative?” I think now we’ve proved that I’m a conservative, right? (Applause.)For more than four decades, this event has served as a forum for our nation’s top leaders, activists, writers, thinkers. Year after year, leaders have stood on this stage to discuss what we can do together to protect our heritage, to promote our culture, and to defend our freedom.CPAC has always been about big ideas and it’s also been about putting those ideas into action. And CPAC really has put a lot of ideas into action. We’ll talk about some of them this morning.For the last year, with your help, we have put more great conservative ideas into use than perhaps ever before in American history. (Applause.) Right?By the way, what a nice picture that is. Look at that. I’d love to watch that guy speak. (Laughter.) Oh, boy. That’s a—I try like hell to hide that bald spot, folks. I work hard at it. (Applause.) It doesn’t look bad. Hey, we’re hanging in. We’re hanging in. We’re hanging in there, right? Together, we’re hanging in.We’ve confirmed a record number—so important—of circuit court judges, and we are going to be putting in a lot more. (Applause.) And they will interpret the law as written. And we’ve confirmed an incredible new Supreme Court justice, a great man, Neil Gorsuch. (Applause.) Right?We’ve passed massive—biggest in history—tax cuts and reforms. (Applause.) You know, I don’t use the word “reform.” There was a lot of reform, too. Very positive reform. I don’t use it. And when we were first doing it, I told everybody—everybody gathered—I said, “Just talk about tax cuts. People don’t know what reform means. They think reform might mean it’s going up.” And I said, “Do tax cuts.”AUDIENCE: Booo —AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Thank you. How did he get in here, Matt? Boy. Okay. Just for the media, the fake news back there, they took very good care of him. They were very gentle. (Laughter.) He was very obnoxious. It was only one person.So we have thousands of people here. (Applause.) So listen—tomorrow, the headline will be, “Protestors disturbed the Trump…”—one person, folks. Doesn’t deserve a mention. Doesn’t deserve a headline. The headline tomorrow: “Disrupters of CPAC.” One person. And he was very nice—we looked at him, and he immediately left. Okay. (Laughter and applause.)No, I’ve had it too often. You’ll have one person, and you can hardly even hear him. In fact, the biggest, really, disturbance are you people. You know why? He’ll say something; nobody hears him. Because it’s all—and then the crowd will start screaming at him. And then all of a sudden we stop for—and that’s okay. You have to show your spirit, right? You have to show your spirit. It’s true. (Applause.)So we passed the biggest tax cuts in the history of our country. And it was called “tax cut and reform.” And I said to our people, don’t use the word “reform.” Because we were going to call it the “Tax Reform Act.” I said, “No wonder for 45 years nothing has been passed.” Because people want tax cuts, and they don’t know what reform means. Reform can mean you’re going to pay more tax. So I convinced politicians who have done this all their lives—and they do a great job, in many cases—but this was one—they were going, the “Tax Reform Act” of whatever year we want to put. Okay?So they have the Tax Reform Act, and that was it. And now it was called the Tax Act—Tax Cut Act and Jobs. We had to add “jobs” into it because we’re picking up a tremendous number of jobs—2.7 million jobs since the election. 2.7. (Applause.)So now people hear tax cuts, and it has been popular. Remember, it started off a little slow. Then it got passed, and we had some great help. I will say, we had some great help in the Senate, in the House. We have guys here today—we have a lot of congressmen, we have a lot of senators. We had a lot of help. And we got it passed.Just—it was not easy. We didn’t have one Democrat vote, and I think that’s going to cost them in the midterms. I know that whoever wins the presidency has a disadvantage, for whatever reason, in the midterms. You know what happens? I’m trying to figure it out. Because historically, if you win the presidency, you don’t do well two years later. And you know what? We can’t let that happen. (Applause.) And I know what happens. I finally figured it out. Nobody has been able to explain it. It just happens, statistically, almost all of the time for many years.What happens is, you fight so hard to win the presidency. You fight, fight, fight. And now only two years—that’s a very short period. And by the time you start campaigning, it’s a year. And now you got to go and fight again. But you just won. So nobody has that same drive that they had. So you end up not doing that well because the other side is going—they’re crazed. And, by the way, they’re crazed anyway, these people. They are really crazed. (Laughter and applause.) Right?So—because I kept trying to say, “Why is this?” But it’s just there. So the great enthusiasm—you know, you’re sitting back, you’re watching television. “Maybe I don’t have to vote today; we just won the presidency.” And then we get clobbered, and we can’t let that happen. We get clobbered in ’18, and we can’t let that happen—only because we are so happy, we passed so many things. Honestly, and I’ll say—I’ll use the word “my administration” as opposed to me—my administration, I think, has had the most successful first year in the history of the presidency. I really believe that. I really believe it. I really believe it. (Applause.) So, I mean, judges, regulations, everything.And the beautiful thing about the tax cuts is nobody thought we could do it. Because again, we had to get 100 percent of our vote. And nobody thought we could do it. And, frankly—I mean, to me we got it and it’s turned out to be one of the most popular things. And, by the way, for the Republicans in this room, of which I assume—would you say, is it 99 percent, Matt, or 100 percent? Huh? I would hope it’s close to—you know what, hey, we probably have some Democrats that want to come over. We have a great governor from West Virginia that left the Democratic Party—Big Jim—and he came over to the Republican Party. (Applause.)So people are sitting there, and they’re saying, “Oh, we just had that great victory. Eh, let’s not vote. Let’s go to a movie. We’re the Republican Party, we’re going to do great.” And then they end up losing.So you got to keep up the enthusiasm. Now what happens, by the way, they lose. And then you have the presidential election coming up again, and you clobber them because everybody gets off their ass and they get out and they work. Right? And they work. And they work and work and work. And you end up winning the Presidency again. And we should do that—hopefully we’re going to do that very easily.But never—we have to worry—right now, we have a big race coming up in ’18. You have to get out. You have to just get that enthusiasm. Keep it going. (Applause.)See, the word, really, is “complacent.” People get complacent. It’s a natural instinct. You just won, and now you’re happy and you’re complacent. Don’t be complacent. Okay? Don’t be complacent. Because if they get in, they will repeal your tax cuts, they will put judges in that you wouldn’t believe, they’ll take away your Second Amendment, which we will never allow to happen. (Applause.) They’ll take away your Second Amendment. (Applause).AUDIENCE: Donald Trump! Donald Trump!THE PRESIDENT: Remember that. They will take away—thank you. They will take away those massive tax cuts and they will take away your Second Amendment. By the way, if you only had a choice of one, what would you rather have? The Second Amendment or the tax cuts? Go ahead, Second Amendment, tax cuts. Second Amendment. (Applause.) I’m going to leave it at the Second Amendment. I don’t want to get into that battle, all right?We’re going to say you want—Matt, we’re going to say you want the Second Amendment the most. But we’re going to get them all. And remember this—(applause)—remember this: We’ve gotten—you know, somebody got on television recently and they said, actually, this is the first time I can remember—Trump made campaign promises. He may be the only person that actually fulfilled more promises than he made. I think that’s true. (Applause.) I fulfilled more promises.But we have a very crooked media. We had a crooked candidate, too, by the way. But we have a very, very crooked media.AUDIENCE: Lock her up! Lock her up! Lock her up!THE PRESIDENT: I will say this, folks: Everything that’s turning out, now it’s amazing that’s come full circle. Boy, have they committed a lot of atrocities when you look. (Applause.) Right? When you look. Have they done things that are wrong.But remember this: Not only did we get the tax cuts, which everybody said we wouldn’t get—and, by the way, repealed, in that tax cut, the individual mandate, which is a tremendous thing. (Applause.)This is where you’re forced to pay in order not to have healthcare. Okay? Is that great? You pay for the privilege of not having healthcare. So you’re subsidizing lots of other people. That’s gone. I know people came up to me with tears in their eyes; they’re saying, I’m forced to pay not to have healthcare. Very unfair.And, by the way, we’re having tremendous plans coming out now—healthcare plans—at a fraction of the cost that are much better than Obamacare. (Applause.) And except for one Senator, who came into a room at 3 o’clock in the morning and went like that—we would have had healthcare, too.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: We would have had healthcare, too. Think of that. But I think we may be better off the way we’re doing it. It’s piece by piece by piece. Obamacare is just being wiped out. The individual mandate, essentially, wipes it out. (Applause.) So I think we may be better off. And people are getting great healthcare plans and we’re not finished yet.But, remember, one person walked into a room when he was supposed to go this way, and he said he was going this way, and he walked in, and he went this way, and everyone said, “What happened? What was that all about?” Boy, oh, boy. Who was that? I don’t know. I don’t know. I don’t know. I don’t want to be controversial, so I won’t use his name. Okay? (Laughter.) What a mess. But it’s all happening anyway. It’s all happening anyway.And we’ve, at the same time, eliminated a record number of job-killing regulations, and people are going back to work. (Applause.) Right? People are going back to work. So—and you know, the fake news always—if I say something that’s like, a little off, next day headline, “He misrepresents…”—I have to be careful.But in the history of Presidents, no President—and I’m saying no President. Now, maybe they’ll find I was off by two but we’re here one year. (Laughter.) No President—well, I read it in lots of good papers, actually. (Laughter.) But they’ll change the story when I say it. No President has ever cut so many regulations in their entire term, okay—(applause)—as we’ve cut in less than a year. (Applause.)And it’s my opinion that the regulations had as big an impact as these massive tax cuts that we’ve given. So I really believe it. (Applause.)We’ve ended the war on American energy. We were in war. And we’ve ended the war on beautiful, clean coal. (Applause.) One of our great natural resources. And very important for our defense—coal—very important for our defense. Because we have it. We don’t have to send it through pipes. We don’t have to get it from foreign countries. We have more than anybody. And they wanted to end it. And our miners have been mistreated and they’re not being mistreated anymore. We’re doing tremendous business. (Applause.)I was in Vietnam, and the Prime Minister and the President of Vietnam were there. And we have a massive deficit with them, like we do with everybody else because these Presidents have just let it go to hell. We have the worst trade deals you’ve ever seen. So we’re changing it.So I said, we have too big of a deficit with Vietnam; I’m not happy. He said, “Well, but we’re going to…” I said, “Buy coal. Buy coal.” They use a lot of coal. Buy coal. And he said, “You know, we have bought coal from West Virginia and other places, and it’s the finest coal we have ever used.” It’s interesting. And West Virginia now is doing great. You look at what’s happening in West Virginia. You look at what’s happening in Pennsylvania. You look at what’s happening in Ohio. (Applause.) And you look at what’s happening in Wyoming. You look at what’s happening all over. It’s like a—it’s like a different world.And remember this: Virtually, as soon as I got into office, we approved the Keystone XL pipeline and the Dakota Access pipeline, which would never have been approved. (Applause.) And we announced our withdrawal from the totally disastrous, job-killing, wealth-knocking-out—you know, it knocked out our wealth, or it would have. They basically wanted to take our wealth away. They didn’t want us to use our wealth power. We knocked out the Paris Climate Accord. Would have been a disaster. (Applause.) Would have been a disaster for our country.AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: You know, basically, it said, you have a lot of oil and gas that we found—you know, technology has been amazing—and we found things that we never knew. But we have massive—just about the top in the world—we have massive energy reserves. We have coal. We have so much. And basically, they were saying, don’t use it, you can’t use it.So what it does is it makes us uncompetitive with other countries. It’s not going to happen. I told them, it’s not going to happen. And, you know, China, their agreement didn’t kick in until 2030. Right? Our agreement kicks in immediately. Russia, they’re allowed to go back into the 1990s, which was not a clean environmental time.Other countries, big countries—India and others—we had to pay, because they considered them a growing country. They were a growing country. I said, “What are we?” Are we allowed to grow too? Okay? (Laughter.) Now, are we allowed to grow? (Applause.) They called India a “developing nation.” They called China a “developing nation.” But the United States, we’re developed—we can pay.So, folks, if you don’t mind—I’ll tell you what—it’s amazing how many people understood the Paris Accord, because it sounds so good. It’s like some of the environmental regulations that I cut—they have the most beautiful titles. And sometimes I’d say, “Look, I’m just going to close my eyes and sign this because, you know what, I’m going to get killed on this one.” And I get so much thanks. The country knows what I’m doing. We couldn’t build. We couldn’t farm. If you had a puddle on your land, they called it a lake for the purposes of environmentals. (Applause.) I mean, it’s crazy. It’s crazy.And I’d sign certain bills and I’d have farmers behind me and I’d have house builders, home builders behind me. And these are tough people, strong people. They fought hard. They’ve worked all their lives, hard. And they’d be—half of them would be crying because we gave them their property back. We gave them the right to earn a living. They couldn’t do it. They couldn’t do what they had to do. We gave them their property back. We gave them their dignity back. (Applause.)By the way, you don’t mind if I go off script a little bit because, you know, it’s sort of boring. It’s a little boring. (Applause.) Got this beautiful speech, everything is wonderful but a little boring. We have to, you know —But we gave them their dignity back. And that’s why our country is doing record business. We’re doing record business. We’re doing business—and you have to look at the fundamentals. Companies are pouring back into this country. They’re pouring back. Not like — I mean, when did you hear about car companies coming back into Michigan and coming to Ohio and expanding? (Applause.) When did you hear — you never heard that. You hear they’re leaving. I’ve been talking about it for 20 years.I was a private sector guy. But for whatever reason, I always had — these guys always covered me much more than anybody else. I always got a lot of these characters. They used to treat me so good too, until I ran for office. I used to get the greatest publicity. A friend of mine said, “You know, you used to be the king of getting great publicity. What happened?” I said, “Well, I have some views that they’re opposed to for a lot of bad reasons.” (Laughter.) A lot of really bad reasons.But when you look at what’s happening to our country, it’s incredible. And the fundamentals are so strong. The stock market — I just see with all of the ups and downs — since Election Day, is up 37 percent from Election — 37 percent. (Applause.) Now, it did a little bit of a correction. In fact, I started to say — you know, I was in it for like 13, 14 months from election. I say, “Is this sucker ever going down a little bit? This is a little embarrassing.” It was up 100, up 200, up 1,000, up 150, up 90, up 63. I said, “Good, that’s better.” (Laughter.) You know, hey, we’ve got seven years to go, folks. You know, we got a long time to go. (Applause.) So thank you, everybody. You’ve been amazing. You’ve been amazing.You know what Matt didn’t say — when I was here in 2011, I made a speech, and I was received with such warmth. And they give — they used to give — I don’t know if Matt does that because he might not want to be controversial, but they used to give “the best speech of CPAC.” Do they do that still, Matt? Because you better pick me or I’m not coming back again. (Laughter.)But — and I got these — everybody, they loved that speech. And that was, I think, Matt — I would say, that might have been the first real political speech that I made. It was a love fest — 2011, I believe the time was — and a lot of people remembered, and they said, “We want Trump. We want Trump.” And after a few years, they go by, and I say, “Here we are. Let’s see what we can do.”And then everybody said, “He cannot get elected. He cannot do it.” You need 270 votes. You need Electoral College — which, by the way, is much tougher than the popular vote. The popular vote, actually, would be so much easier. You go three or four states, and you just go and you just do great job. Hillary forgets that. You know, she went to these states. I said, “What’s she doing? Why does she keep going back to California?” (Laughter.) Crazy.Next time, they’re going to remember Iowa. They’re going to remember Ohio. (Applause.) Remember? They spent a lot of time in Pennsylvania to no avail. (Applause.) They spent a lot of money. They spent a lot of money in North Carolina, the great state of North Carolina. (Applause.) We did very well there. We have a great person in the room, Mark Meadows, from North Carolina. (Applause.) He’s around here. Where’s Mark? Where’s Mark? And Deb. And we have Jim Jordan. Warriors. Warriors all. (Applause.) We have a lot of great — we have a lot of great people here. But, you know, we just — we hit a chord.And if you remember, 2011, probably that was the beginning of what we’ve done. And hopefully, at the end of a period of time, people are going to say thank you, because it is not easy. We’re fighting a lot of forces. They’re forces that are doing the wrong thing. They’re just doing the wrong thing. I don’t want to talk about what they have in mind. But they do the wrong thing. But we’re doing what’s good for our country for the long-term viability and survival. Like, for instance, $700 billion got approved for our military. Our military was going to hell. (Applause.)We declined to certify the terrible one-sided Iran nuclear deal. That was a horrible deal. (Applause.) Whoever heard you give $150 billion to a nation that has no respect for you whatsoever? They’re saying “Death to America” while they’re signing the agreement. If somebody said “Death to America” while I’m signing an agreement, and I’m President, I immediately say, “What’s going on here, folks? I’m not signing.” (Laughter.) What’s going on?They just kept going. Kerry — Kerry may be the worst negotiator I’ve ever seen. (Laughter.) How about this guy — how about — and Obama, of course — he’s the one. But how about $1.8 billion in cash? Did you ever see what, like, a million dollars in hundred-dollar bills? A lot of people do it as a promotion. It’s a lot. It’s big. It’s like big. (Laughter.) Now, take that, go to $1.8 billion in cash. $1.8 billion. For what? For what? Why did we do this? Why did we do it?Anyway, we didn’t certify, and lots of interesting things are happening with that whole mess. But we have to treat — people that treat us well, we treat them well. People that treat us badly, we treat them much worse than they can ever imagine. That’s the way it has to be. (Applause.) That’s the way it has to be.We officially recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. (Applause.) You know, every President campaigned on, “We’re going to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.” Everybody — for many Presidents — you’ve been reading it. And then they never pulled it off. And I now know why.Because I put the word out that I may do it. Right? I said, I’d do it in my campaign, so that usually means — unless I find something — I’m going to do it. I was hit by more countries and more pressure and more people calling, begging me, “Don’t do it. Don’t do it. Don’t do it.” I said, “We have to do it. It’s the right thing to do. It’s the right thing to do. We have to do it.” (Applause.) And I did it.But every other President really lied, because they campaigned on it. That was always a big part of the campaign. And then they got into office; they never did it. So I understand why they didn’t do it. Because there was tremendous — the campaign against it was so incredible. But you know what? The campaign for it was also incredible, and we did the right thing. (Applause.)So we’ve kept our promise, as I said, to rebuild our military, eliminating the defense sequester, which is a disaster. And I don’t know if you saw the number, $700 billion. You know, ultimately, that comes before everything else. We can talk about lots of things. But if we don’t have a strong military, you might not be allowed into this room someday. Okay? You may not have your houses, your homes, your beautiful communities. We better take care of our military. These are the greatest people, and we’re going to take care of our veterans. (Applause.) We’re going to take care of the vets. We’ve been doing a good job on the vets.And after years of rebuilding other nations — we rebuild other nations — we rebuild other nations that have a lot of money, and we don’t ever say, “Hey, you got to help.” We’re finally rebuilding our nation. We’re rebuilding our nation. (Applause.) And we’re restoring our confidence and our pride.All of us here today are united by the same timeless values. We defend our Constitution, and we believe in the wisdom of our Founders. Our Constitution is great. (Applause.) We support the incredible men and women of law enforcement. (Applause.) True. We know that a strong nation must have strong borders. We celebrate our history and our heroes, and we believe young Americans should be taught to love their country and to respect its traditions.Don’t worry, you’re getting the wall. Don’t worry, okay? I heard some — (applause) — we’re getting the wall.AUDIENCE: Build that wall! Build that wall! Build that wall!THE PRESIDENT: I had a couple of these characters in the back say, “Oh, he really doesn’t want the wall. He just used that for campaigning.” I said, are you — can you believe it? (Laughter.) You know, I say, every time I hear that, the wall gets 10 feet higher. You know that, right? (Applause.) Every time. Every single time. Okay?No, we’re going to have the wall or they’re not going to have what they want. You know, we have a problem: We need more Republicans. We have a group of people that vote against us in a bloc. They’re good at two things: resisting, obstruction. Resisting, obstruction. And they stick together. They do. They always vote in a bloc. You know, it’s very rare that you get a couple of them to come your way. Even on the tax cuts. I mean, we’re going to be fighting these people in the ’18 election. We’re going to be fighting people that voted against the tax cuts, because the tax cuts are phenomenal and popular, and helping people and helping our country.You saw Apple just brought $350 billion in; Exxon brought $50 billion in. (Applause.) So we’re going to be fighting.The fact is, we need more Republicans to vote. (Applause.) We want to get our agenda. Because, now, what we have to do is in order to get a vote to fix our military, we have to give them $100 billion in stuff that nobody in this room, including me, wants, in many cases. It’s terrible. We need more Republicans. That’s why you have to get out and you have to fight for ’18. You have to do it. (Applause.)We salute our great American flag, we put our hands on our hearts for the Pledge of Allegiance. (Applause.) And we all proudly stand for the national anthem. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: Above all else, we know that faith and family, not government and bureaucracy, are at the center of American life. We know that. (Applause.) Because in America, we don’t worship government, we worship God. (Applause.)Our nation’s motto is, “In God We Trust.” (Applause.) And this week, our nation lost an incredible leader who devoted his life to helping us understand what those words really mean. Leader. He was a leader. He was a great man.We will never forget the historic crowds, that voice, the energy, and the profound faith of a preacher named Billy Graham. (Applause.) Great man and great family. Franklin Graham. Great family. And they were for us — I’ll tell you, they were for us. Right from the beginning they were for us.As a young man, Billy decided to devote his life to God. That choice not only changed his life, it changed our country. And indeed, it even changed the world.Reverend Graham’s belief in the power of God’s word gave hope to millions and millions who listened to him with his very beautiful, but very simple message: God loves you. (Applause.) And a very special tribute — because it’s almost never done — on Wednesday, we will celebrate Billy Graham’s life as he lies in honor in the Rotunda of our Capitol. (Applause.) Very rarely.One day — Wednesday until Thursday, about 11 o’clock on Wednesday. I bet those lines are going to be long and beautiful, because he deserves it. Not everybody deserves it. But very few people — you look back, Ronald Reagan was so honored. Very few people are so honored. That’s a big thing. And he really, almost more than anybody you can think of, he deserves to be in the Rotunda. So that’s going to be very special. Wednesday at 11 o’clock. (Applause.) And Paul, and Mitch, and the whole group, they worked very hard to make it all happen. So we want to thank them too.Everywhere you go, all over the country, in cities small and large, Americans of all faiths reach out to our Creator for strength, for inspiration, and for healing. Great time for healing. In times of grief and hardship, we turn to prayer for solace and for comfort.In recent days, our entire nation has been filled with terrible pain and sorrow over the evil massacre in a great community — Parkland, Florida. This senseless act of mass murder has shocked our nation and broken our hearts.This week, I had the honor of meeting with students from Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, with families who have lost their children in prior shootings — great families, great people — and with members of the local community right here in Washington, D.C. Our whole nation was moved by their strength and by their courage.We listened to their heart-wrenching stories, asked them for ideas, and pledged to them — and I can speak for all of the senators and congressmen and congresswomen, all of the people in this room that are involved in this decision — that we will act. We will do something. We will act.With us on Wednesday was one of the families whose daughter didn’t come home last week — a beautiful young woman named Meadow Pollack. Incredible family. I had them in the Oval Office. Incredible people. You’ve probably seen her picture. She had a beautiful, beautiful smile, and a beautiful life. So full of promise.We wish there was something — anything — we could do to bring Meadow and all of the others back. There are not enough tears in the world to express our sadness and anguish for her family, and for every family that has lost a precious loved one. No family should ever save — and ever have to go in and suffer the way these families have suffered. They’ve suffered beyond anything that I’ve ever witnessed.A father drops his daughter off at school, kisses her goodbye, waves to her — she’s walking up the path — and never sees her alive again. Gets a call. Can’t believe it. Thinks it’s a nightmare. Wants to wake up from the nightmare.So we want to hear ideas from Americans of all backgrounds and beliefs about how we can improve security at our schools, tackle the issue of mental health. Because this was a sick person — very sick — and we had a lot of warning about him being sick. This wasn’t a surprise. To the people that knew him, this wasn’t even a little bit; in fact, some said, were surprised it took so long. So what are we doing? What are we doing? We want to ensure that when there are warning signs, we can act and act very quickly.Why do we protect our airports, and our banks, our government buildings, but not our schools? (Applause.) It’s time to make our schools a much harder target for attackers. We don’t want them in our schools. (Applause.) We don’t want them.When we declare our schools to be gun-free zones, it just puts our students in far more danger. (Applause.) Far more danger. Well-trained, gun-adept teachers and coaches and people that work in those buildings; people that were in the Marines for 20 years and retired; people in the Army, the Navy, the Air Force, the Coast Guard; people that are adept — adept with weaponry and with guns — they teach. I mean, I don’t want to have 100 guards standing with rifles all over the school. You do a concealed carry permit. (Applause.)And this would be a major deterrent because these people are inherently cowards. If they thought — like, if this guy thought that other people would be shooting bullets back at him, he wouldn’t have gone to that school. He wouldn’t have gone there. It’s a gun-free zone. It says, this is a gun-free zone; please check your guns way far away. And what happens is they feel safe. There’s nobody going to come at them.This way, you may have — and remember, if you use this school as an example — this is a very big school with tremendous floor area and a lot of acreage. It’s a big, big school. Good school. A big, big school. You’d have to have 150 real guards. Look, you had one guard. He didn’t turn out to be too good, I will tell you that. He turned out to be not good. He was not a credit to law enforcement, that I can tell you. That I can tell you. (Applause.)But as I’ve been talking about this idea — and I feel it’s a great idea, but some people that are good people are opposed to it; they don’t like the idea of teachers doing it. But I’m not talking about teachers. You know, CNN went on, they said, “Donald Trump wants all teachers.” Okay? Fake news, folks. Fake news. Fake news.I don’t want a person that’s never handled a gun that wouldn’t know what a gun looks like to be armed. But out of your teaching population — out of your teaching population, you have 10 percent, 20 percent of very gun-adept people. Military people, law enforcement people, they teach. They teach. (Applause.)And something I thought of this morning. You know what else? And I thought of it since I found and watched Peterson, the deputy who didn’t go into the school because he didn’t want to go into the school. Okay? He was tested under fire, and that wasn’t a good result.But you know what I thought of as soon as I saw that? These teachers — and I’ve seen them at a lot of schools where they had problems — these teachers love their students. And the students love their teachers, in many cases. These teachers love their students. And these teachers are talented with weaponry and with guns. And they feel safe. And I’d rather have somebody that loves their students and wants to protect their students than somebody standing outside that doesn’t know anybody and doesn’t know the students, and, frankly, for whatever reason, decided not to go in even though he heard lots of shots being fired inside.The teachers and the coaches and other people in the building — the dean, the assistant dean, the principal — they can — they love their people. They want to protect these kids. And I think we’re better with that. And this may be 10 percent or 20 percent of the population of teachers, et cetera. It’s not all of them. But you would have a lot, and you would tell people that they’re inside. And the beauty is, it’s concealed. Nobody would ever see it unless they needed it. It’s concealed.So this crazy man who walked in wouldn’t even know who it is that has it. That’s good. That’s not bad; that’s good. And a teacher would have shot the hell out of him before he knew what happened. (Applause.) They love their students. They love those students, folks. Remember that. They love their students.And I’m telling you that would work. Because we need offensive capability. We can’t just say, oh, it’s a gun-free school. We’re going to do it a little bit better. Because then you say, “What happens outside?” The students now leave school, and you got a thousand students — you got 3,500 at the school we’re talking about — but you have a thousand students standing outside. The teachers are out there also. If a madman comes along, we have the same problem, but it’s outside of the school. Or they drive cars. There are a lot of things that can happen.I want to stop it. And I know it’s a little controversial to say — but I have to say, since I started this two days ago, a lot of people that were totally opposed to it are now agreeing. They love their students. They don’t want their students to be killed or to be hurt. (Applause.)So we have to do something that works. And one of the big measures that we will do, and everybody in this room I think has to agree — and there’s nobody that loves the Second Amendment more than I do. And there’s nobody that respects the NRA — they’re friends of mine. They backed us all. They’re great people. They’re patriots. (Applause.) But they’re great people. But we really do have to strengthen up, really strengthen up background checks. We have to do that. (Applause.)And we have to do — for the mentally ill, we have to do very, very — we don’t want to people that are mentally ill to be having any form of weaponry. We have to be very strong on that. (Applause.)So we’re going to do that. And I really believe that Congress is going to get it through this time. And they have a different leader. They have somebody that wants to get it through; not somebody that’s just all talk, no action, like so many of these folks. This is somebody that wants to get it through.But I also want to protect — we need a hardened site. It has to be hardened. It can’t be soft. Because they’ll sneak in through a window, they’ll sneak in some way. And, again, you’re standing there totally unprotected.You know the five great soldiers from four years ago, three of them were world-class marksmen. They were on a military base in a gun-free zone. They were asked to check their guns quite far away. And a maniac walked in, guns blazing, killed all of five of them. He wouldn’t of had a chance if these world-class marksmen had — on a military base — access to their guns. And I’m going to look at that whole policy on military bases. If we can’t have — (applause) — all five were killed. All five. The guy wouldn’t have had a chance.But we’re going to look at that whole military base, gun-free zone. If we can’t have our military holding guns, it’s pretty bad. We had a number of instances on military bases. You know that. So we want to protect our military. We want to make our military stronger and better than it’s ever been before. (Applause.)We also need to create a culture in our country that cherishes life and human dignity. That’s part of what we’re talking about. (Applause.) A culture that condemns violence and never glorifies violence. We need to foster real human connections and turn classmates and colleagues into friends and neighbors that want to fight for us.We’re not just having a conversation about school safety. You’ve had conversations — in all fairness, I’m pretty new on this job. We’re here a little more than a year. I’ve been watching this stuff go on for 20 years. The President gets up, everybody is enthusiastic for the first couple of days, then it fades, fades, fades. Nothing ever gets done. We want to see if we can get it done. Let’s get it done right. (Applause.) We really owe it to our country. And I’ve been watching for a long time. Seen a lot of words, and I’ve seen very little action.And, you know, if you think about, most of its just common sense. It’s not “do you love guns, do hate guns.” It’s common sense. It’s all common sense. And some of the strongest advocates about what I’m saying are the strongest advocates — I know them very well — political people — the strongest advocates for the Second Amendment. But this is common sense.In addition to securing our schools, we’re also implementing a strategy to secure our streets. We want our kids to be safe everywhere they go, whether they’re in a classroom walking home from school or just outside playing with their friends. (Applause.) Every child deserves to grow up in a safe community surrounded by a loving family and to have a future filled with opportunity and with hope. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you. Just not fair.Reducing violent crime in America is a top priority for my administration, and we will do whatever it takes to get it done. No talk. We’re going to do what it takes to get it done. (Applause.)As you’ve seen, pretty well reported, that we’re significantly increasing gun prosecutions by tremendous percentages, and we’re working to get violent offenders off our streets and behind bars, and get them behind bars quickly, for a long time, or get them the hell out of our country. (Applause.)In 2017, we brought cases against more violent offenders than any administration in a quarter of a century — more than any administration. And we’re just gearing up. We have tough people. I’ll tell you what — when you deal with MS-13, the only thing they understand is toughness. They don’t want anything. All they understand is toughness. If that ICE agent or Border Patrol agent is tougher than them, they respect him. We got the toughest guys you’ve ever seen. We got tough. (Applause.) They don’t respect anything else. And they shouldn’t be in our country. They were let in for years. They shouldn’t be, and we’re getting them out.Our administration prosecuted more people for federal firearm charges than has been done in more than a decade. And again, we’re just gearing up. We’ve convicted 1,200 gang members and nearly 500 human traffickers. (Applause.) You know what human trafficking — who would think that we have this in this age? And with our foreign partners, we’ve helped charge or arrest more than 4,000 members of the savage gang that we talked about — MS-13.Now, they don’t like guns. You know why? They’re not painful enough. These are animals. They cut people. They cut them. They cut them up in little pieces and they want them to suffer. And we take them into our country because our immigration laws are so bad. And when we catch them — it’s called catch-and-release — we have to, by law, catch them and then release them. Catch-and-release. And I can’t get the Democrats — and nobody has been able to for years — to approve common-sense measures that, when we catch these animal-killers, we can lock them up and throw away the keys. (Applause.)In 2017, our brave ICE officers arrested more than 100,000 criminal aliens who have committed tens of thousands of crimes. And believe me, these are great people. They cannot — the laws are just against us. They’re against — they’re against safety. They don’t make sense. And you meet with Democrats and they’re always fighting for the criminal. They’re not fighting for law-abiding citizens. They’re always fighting for the criminal. (Applause.) Doesn’t make sense.Here are just some of the criminal charges and convictions for the aliens arrested by ICE: 11,000 charges or convictions for sex crimes; 48,000 for assault; 13,000 for burglary; and 1,800 for killing people.We’re cracking down on sanctuary cities. Can you believe this? (Applause.) Where they protect — that’s another one. Because we want our cities to be sanctuaries for law-abiding Americans, not for criminals. (Applause.)And, by the way, the Senate Democrats and the House Democrats have totally abandoned DACA. They’ve total — they don’t even talk to me about it. They have totally abandoned. You know, we get the reputation — like DACA, it’s not Republican. We’ll let me tell you, it is Republican, because we want to do something about DACA, get it solved after all these years.The Democrats are being totally unresponsive. They don’t want to do anything about DACA, I’m telling you. And it’s very possible that DACA won’t happen, and it’s not because of the Republicans, it’s going to be because of the Democrats. And frankly, you better elect more Republicans, folks, or it will never happen. (Applause.)The Democrats voted in favor of sanctuary cities. In other words, they voted to protect criminal aliens instead of voting to protect the American citizens.To secure our country, we are calling on Congress to build a great border wall to stop dangerous drugs and criminals from pouring into our country. (Applause.) And now they’re willing to give us the wall, but they don’t want to give us any of the laws to keep these people out.So we’re going to get the wall, but they don’t want to give us all of the other — chain migration, lottery. Think of a lottery. You have a country. They put names in. You think they’re giving us their good people? Not too many of you people are going to be in a lottery. So we pick out people. Then they turn out to be horrendous, and we don’t understand why.They’re not giving us their best people, folks. They’re not giving us — I mean, use your heads. They’re giving us — it’s a lottery. I don’t want people coming into this country with a lottery. I want people coming into this country based on merit. Based on merit. (Applause.)I want people, and we all want to be admitting people, who have skills, who can support themselves financially, who can contribute to our economy, who will love our people, and who will share our values, who will love our country. (Applause.)I don’t want people who drive a car at 100 miles an hour down the West Side Highway and kill 8 innocent victims, and destroy the lives of 14 more. Nobody talks about that. Nobody ever talks about the people that have been so horribly injured, who lose legs and arms, in Manhattan, where I used to spend my time.I know it very well, the stretch along the West Side Highway. People run in order to stay in shape. They want to be healthy, they want to look good. They’re running all the time; I see it. They run. We work in different ways. (Laughter.) But they run. No, but think of this — they run. And they’re so — they want to be fit. They’re proud people. They want to be fit, and they’re running up and down West Side Highway. It’s beautiful. It’s a beautiful thing.And this maniac takes a car going down the highway, and just turns to a right, and he kills eight. But he really badly wounded 12 to 14 other people.So somebody think of it: Runs to stay in shape, leaves the house, is jogging along, working hard, ends up going home two months later with no leg or with no arm, or with two legs missing. Nobody ever talks about that. They talk about the people, rightfully, that were killed. But they don’t talk about the people whose lives have been just changed — just changed. They don’t talk about that.This guy came in through chain migration and a part of the lottery system.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: They say 22 people came in with him. In other words, an aunt, an uncle, a grandfather, a mother, a father, whoever came in. But a lot of people came in. That’s chain migration. Let’s see how those people are doing, by the way.We’ve got to change our way. Merit system. I want merit system. Because you know what’s happening? All of these companies are coming into our country. They’re all coming into our country. And when they come in, we need people that are going to work. I’m telling you, we need workers now. We need workers. (Applause.)But when I walked in today, did anyone ever hear me do the snake during the campaign? Because I had five people outside say, “Could you do ‘The Snake’?” And I said, well, people have heard it. Who hasn’t heard “The Snake”? You should read it anyways. (Laughs.) Let’s do it anyway. I’ll do it. All right? Should we do it? (Applause.)Now, this was a rock-and-roll song — little amendments — a rock-and-roll song. But every time I do it, people — and you have to think of this in terms of immigration. We have to have great people come into our — I want people to come into our country. And I want people that are going to help us. And I don’t want people that are going to come in and be accepting all of the gifts of our country for the next 50 years and contribute nothing. I don’t want that, and you don’t want that.I want people that are going to help and people that are going to work for Chrysler, who is now moving from Mexico into Michigan, and so many other — and Apple, by the way. (Applause.) And Foxconn up in Wisconsin. They’re going to need 25,000 workers. I want people that can come in, and get to work and work hard. Even if it means a learning period — that’s fine.But I want people that are going to come in and work. And I want people that love us and look at security. And they want you to be safe, and they want to be safe. I want great people coming into this country. I don’t want people coming in the way they do now, because I want people that contribute.So this is called “The Snake.” And think of it in terms of immigration. And you may love it, or you may say, isn’t that terrible. Okay? And if you say, isn’t that terrible, who cares? Because the way they treat me — that’s peanuts compared to the way they treat me. Okay? (Laughter.) Immigration.“On her way to work one morning, down the path along the lake, a tenderhearted woman saw a poor, half-hearted, frozen snake. His pretty colored skin had been all frosted with the dew. ‘Poor thing,’ she cried, ‘I’ll take you in, and I’ll take care of you.’‘Take me in, oh, tender woman. Take me in, for Heaven’s sake. Take me in, oh, tender woman,’ sighed the vicious snake.She wrapped him up all cozy in a comforter of silk, and laid him by her fireside with some honey and some milk. She hurried home from work that night, and soon as she arrived, she found that pretty snake she’d taken in had been revived.‘Take me in, oh, tender woman. Take me in for Heaven’s sake. Take me in, oh, tender woman,’ sighed the vicious snake.She clutched him to her bosom, ‘You’re so beautiful,’ she cried. But if I hadn’t brought you in by now, surely you would have died.’She stroked his pretty skin again, and kissed and held him tight. But instead of saying thank you, that snake gave her a vicious bite.‘Take me in, oh, tender woman. Take me in for Heaven’s sake. Take me in, oh, tender woman,’ sighed the vicious snake.‘I saved you,’ cried the woman. ‘And you’ve bitten me. Heaven’s why? You know your bite is poisonous, and now I’m going to die.’‘Oh, shut up, silly woman,’ said the reptile with a grin. ‘You knew damn well I was a snake before you took me in.'” (Applause.)And that’s what we’re doing with our country, folks. We’re letting people in, and it’s going to be a lot of trouble. It’s only getting worse. But we’re giving you protection like never before. Our law enforcement is doing a better job than we’ve ever done before. And we love our country. And we’re going to take care of our country. Okay? We’re going to take care of our country. (Applause.)So just in finishing, our country is starting to do very well. Our economy is blazing. Jobs are at a record level. Jobs are so good. 2.7 million jobs created since the election. (Applause.) Unemployment claims have reached a 45-year low. (Applause.)African American unemployment has reached the lowest level in our history. (Applause.) Hispanic unemployment has reached the lowest level in our history. (Applause.) Women — women unemployment is at the lowest level in 18 years. (Applause.) Wages are rising for the first time in many, many years. (Applause.)Small business confidence is at a record high. And thanks to our massive tax cuts, millions of Americans are getting to keep a great percentage of their money instead of paying it to a government that throws it out the window. (Applause.)So I just leave you with this: We have to fight Nancy Pelosi. They want to give your money away. They want to give your money away. They want to end your tax cuts. They want to do things that you wouldn’t even believe, including taking your Second Amendment rights away. They will do that.AUDIENCE: Booo —THE PRESIDENT: So we have to get out there and we have to fight in ’18 like never before — just the way you fought with us. Just the way you fought with us. You fought so hard, and you were so tough, and you were so smart. You were so smart. And you know what? I know for a fact you did the right thing, because we’re looking at the numbers. And the numbers — even they have to give credit for the kind of numbers that we’re producing. Nobody has ever seen anything like it. (Applause.)Under my administration, the era of economic surrender is over. We’re renegotiating trade deals that are so bad, whether it’s NAFTA or whether it’s World Trade Organization, which created China — that created — if you look at China, it was going along like this, then we opened, stupidly, this deal. And China has been like a rocket ship ever since.And now, last year, we had almost a $500 billion trade deficit with China. We can’t have that. We can’t have that. I have great respect for President Xi, but we can’t have that. We have to go, and we have to do what we have to do. We just can’t let countries — as an example, Mexico. We have a $100 billion trade deficit with Mexico. What does that tell you? You know what it tells you? NAFTA is no good. It never was any good. But for some reason, nobody ever changed it. They emptied our factories — you got to see the car plants and the auto plants in Mexico. Like — you’ve never seen anything like it before.I want those companies — and they’re starting — I want them back here. I want them back here. They’re going to come back here, too. (Applause.) And we want to make our neighbors happy. But we can’t continuously have other nations taking advantage of the United States like never before. And this has gone on for a long time. This has gone on for longer — the last administration was a disaster, but this has gone on for much longer than the last administration. And we got to change it. We’re going to change it.So we’re renegotiating deals. And you know what? Hate to say it, but if we can’t make a fair deal for the United States, we will terminate the deal and we’ll start all over again. (Applause.) We have to do it. (Applause.)So, under my administration, and with your help — don’t forget — you, many of you, were the forgotten people. You were the people that, when the polls came out, they didn’t know that you existed. The Democrats are trying to figure out who you are, because they want to get you back. But you are people — we’ve had people that never voted, but they’re great patriots — but they never saw anybody they wanted to vote for. Then they go to the election, they’ve got Trump-Pence, Trump-Pence. They got hats, they got all sorts of things. Trump over here — “Make America Great Again” hats. Right? (Applause.)So our country is starting to do well. We are going to make it great, better, safer than it ever was before. The reason is you. This has been a great movement. They try like hell, they cannot stand what we’ve done. But we’re doing the right thing. We’re even doing the right thing for them. They just don’t know it yet. (Applause.) They just don’t know it yet.Even the media — the media will absolutely support me sometime prior to the election. All those horrible people back there, they’re going to support me. You know why? Because if somebody else won, their ratings would go down, they’d all be out of business. (Applause.) Nobody would watch. They’d all be out of business.So I just want to tell you that we are going to win. I’d love you to get out there, work really hard for ’18. We need more Republicans to keep the tax cuts and keep all of this going.And I love you. I respect you. I appreciate everything you’ve done for the country. (Applause.)AUDIENCE: USA! USA! USA!THE PRESIDENT: I appreciate everything you’ve done.I do want to say, because people have asked — North Korea — we imposed today the heaviest sanctions ever imposed on a country before. (Applause.)And frankly, hopefully something positive can happen. We will see. But hopefully something positive can happen. But that just was announced, and I wanted to let you know. We have imposed the heaviest sanctions ever imposed.So, ladies and gentlemen, thank you for everything. You have been incredible partners. (Applause.) Incredible partners. And I will let you know in the absolute strongest of terms, we’re going to make America great again, and I will never, ever, ever let you down. Thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you. (Applause.) THE PRESIDENT: My fellow Americans, today I speak to a nation in grief. Yesterday, a school filled with innocent children and caring teachers became the scene of terrible violence, hatred, and evil.Around 2:30 yesterday afternoon, police responded to reports of gunfire at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida—a great and safe community. There, a shooter, who is now in custody, opened fire on defenseless students and teachers. He murdered 17 people and badly wounded at least 14 others.Our entire nation, with one heavy heart, is praying for the victims and their families. To every parent, teacher, and child who is hurting so badly, we are here for you—whatever you need, whatever we can do, to ease your pain. We are all joined together as one American family, and your suffering is our burden also.No child, no teacher, should ever be in danger in an American school. No parent should ever have to fear for their sons and daughters when they kiss them goodbye in the morning.Each person who was stolen from us yesterday had a full life ahead of them—a life filled with wondrous beauty and unlimited potential and promise. Each one had dreams to pursue, love to give, and talents to share with the world. And each one had a family to whom they meant everything in the world.Today, we mourn for all of those who lost their lives. We comfort the grieving and the wounded. And we hurt for the entire community of Parkland, Florida that is now in shock, in pain, and searching for answers.To law enforcement, first responders, and teachers who responded so bravely in the face of danger: We thank you for your courage. Soon after the shooting, I spoke with Governor Scott to convey our deepest sympathies to the people of Florida and our determination to assist in any way that we can. I also spoke with Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi and Broward County Sheriff Scott Israel.I’m making plans to visit Parkland to meet with families and local officials, and to continue coordinating the federal response.In these moments of heartache and darkness, we hold on to God’s word in scripture: “I have heard your prayer and seen your tears. I will heal you.”We trust in that promise, and we hold fast to our fellow Americans in their time of sorrow.I want to speak now directly to America’s children, especially those who feel lost, alone, confused or even scared: I want you to know that you are never alone and you never will be. You have people who care about you, who love you, and who will do anything at all to protect you. If you need help, turn to a teacher, a family member, a local police officer, or a faith leader. Answer hate with love; answer cruelty with kindness.We must also work together to create a culture in our country that embraces the dignity of life, that creates deep and meaningful human connections, and that turns classmates and colleagues into friends and neighbors.Our administration is working closely with local authorities to investigate the shooting and learn everything we can. We are committed to working with state and local leaders to help secure our schools, and tackle the difficult issue of mental health.Later this month, I will be meeting with the nation’s governors and attorney generals, where making our schools and our children safer will be our top priority. It is not enough to simply take actions that make us feel like we are making a difference. We must actually make that difference.In times of tragedy, the bonds that sustain us are those of family, faith, community, and country. These bonds are stronger than the forces of hatred and evil, and these bonds grow even stronger in the hours of our greatest need.And so always, but especially today, let us hold our loved ones close, let us pray for healing and for peace, and let us come together as one nation to wipe away the tears and strive for a much better tomorrow.Thank you. And God Bless you all. Thank you very much. THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, Paul and Mitch, for the introduction and for your tremendous leadership. You folks have done well. I just looked at some numbers. You’ve even done better than you thought, I think—(laughter)—based on what we just saw about 10 minutes ago.And I want to thank you, to the Governor of this incredible state, my very good friend, Jim Justice and his wonderful wife, Cathy, who are with us. And Jim is now a proud member of the Republican Party. He was a Democrat. He switched over, right? (Applause.) You don’t see that too often. Maybe we’ll see it more and more. But thank you, Jim. And the hotel is beautiful, and everything is beautiful. We appreciate it.It’s great to be among so many friends for the second time this week. Tuesday was an incredible evening, as we were all inspired. (Applause.) And I really mean that. We were inspired by America’s heroes and uplifted by everyone who has sacrificed in the fight for freedom. They were, and are, incredible people that we saw that night, and tremendous courage. And one of the people, I have to say—boy, you got a very big hand, Steve. Steve Scalise. A great hand. (Applause.)And we’re all truly blessed to be Americans.Before going any further, I want to send our prayers to everyone affected by the train accident yesterday, and especially to the family of the person who was so tragically killed. Our thoughts are with the victims and their loved ones. And thank you.With us today on stage is our incredible leadership team. And they really have—if you look—you just look at what’s happened in the last short period of time. Without them, I could have never won the Presidency, I guess. I don’t know, could I have won the Presidency without them? (Laughter.) Huh? Steve, yes, right? (Laughter.) I don’t know.But they’ve become very good friends, and we’re now in battle together and in friendship together. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. (Applause.) Thank you, Mitch. Great guy. (Applause.) That was a big win we had, Mitch. Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn. John, thank you. Great job. (Applause.) House Majority Whip Steve Scalise. Again, Steve, thank you. (Applause.) House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy. Kevin. (Applause.) Chair John Thune and House Conference Chair Cathy McMorris Rodgers. (Applause.)Did they forget your name, John? I don’t know. What’s going on here? (Laughter.) John Cornyn, everybody knows. They didn’t put his name up, but that’s okay. That’s the first time that’s ever happened. Hey, John, that will never happen again. (Laughter.)Working together, we’ve accomplished extraordinary things for the American people over the last year, and I really believe this is just the beginning. You know, Paul Ryan called me the other day, and I don’t know if I’m supposed to say this, but I will say that he said to me, he has never, ever seen the Republican Party so united, so much in like with each other. But, literally, the word “united” was the word he used. It’s the most united he’s ever seen the party, and I see it too. I have so many friends in this group, and there is a great coming together that I don’t think either party has seen for many, many years. So—right?SPEAKER RYAN: Yep.THE PRESIDENT: That’s good. (Applause.) I was hoping he wouldn’t deny that. (Laughter.) But he did—he called me, and I thought it was very nice. So thank you, Paul, very much.Every day, we’re removing government burdens and empowering our citizens to follow their hearts and live out their dreams. The priorities of Republicans in Congress are the priorities of the American people. We believe in strong families, and we believe in strong borders. (Applause.)We believe in the rule of law, and we support the men and women of law enforcement. (Applause.)We believe every American has the right to grow up in a safe home and attend a good school and to have access to a really great job.And we know that, for Americans, nothing—absolutely nothing—is out of reach because we don’t know the meaning of the word “quit.” We don’t quit. And the Republican Party certainly hasn’t quit—because if we did, we wouldn’t be here today. We’d be sitting home saying, “Boy, that was a tough year,” instead of, “That was one of the greatest years in the history of politics, in the history of our country for a party—what we’ve done and what we’ve accomplished.” I don’t think it’s been done, and certainly not by much. We had a year that was almost, I would think, unlike any.It was a tremendous success, and I give everybody in this room the credit. And I give, certainly, these people behind me tremendous credit for what took place, especially in that last month. That was a month of tremendous pressure, and that was people that were able to act under pressure. My favorite type of person. They were able to act under tremendous pressure.So I just want to thank you all, because that’s what it was all about. And, you know, it was interesting—while we had a great year, we weren’t being given credit for it—regulations at a level that nobody has ever done. In one year, we knocked out more regulations than anybody. Supreme Court justice, judges, all over. So many different records. So many successes.But when we got the great tax cut bill—and we call it the Tax Cut and Jobs Bill—we got that, it was like putting it all in a box and wrapping it with a beautiful ribbon. We started getting credit not only for that, but for all of the other things that we did during the year. It’s amazing the way that happened. I was surprised, actually.But we got a lot of credit from a lot of people. And all of a sudden, they’re saying, “While we had a lot of accomplishment”—and then they went on to do the thing. But the fact is—(laughter)—you understand that. But we really did. We got a lot of credit. It all came together in that final month. And so I give everybody in this room, really, kudos.We’re a nation of builders and dreamers and strivers and fighters. And together, we’re building a safe, strong, and very proud America, already, since the election. We’ve created 2.4 million jobs. That’s unthinkable. (Applause.) And that doesn’t include all of the things that are happening. You’re going to see numbers that get even better.The stock market has added more than $8 trillion in new wealth. Unemployment claims are at a 45-year low, which is something. After years of wage stagnation, we are finally seeing rising wages. African American and Hispanic unemployment have both reached the lowest levels ever recorded. That’s something very, very special. (Applause.)And when I made that statement the other night, there was zero movement from the Democrats. They sat there, stone cold, no smile, no applause. You would have thought that, on that one, they would have, sort of, at least clapped a little bit. Which tells you, perhaps, they’d rather see us not do well than see our country do great. And that’s not good. That’s not good. We have to change that. (Applause.)And as I said, we’ve eliminated more regulations in our first year than any administration has ever eliminated. And that means four years, eight years, or, in one instance, sixteen years. In one year, we’ve knocked out more regulations. It’s an amazing thing. And I happen to think that that is every bit as important toward our success as the tax cuts.I have many business friends and many people in business that came to me and they say that—including small businesses—they say the fact that they no longer have to go through years of turmoil in getting approved and getting approvals, and getting rule changes and getting all sorts of things, and getting old while they’re waiting to get them—the fact that all of that is gone is probably as important or even more important to the massive tax cuts we’ve gotten people. So that’s something.We’ve signed into law the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history. And I have to say, included in there is the individual mandate. We repealed it. That’s a big one. (Applause.) That’s so big. By itself, that would be a big achievement. And we, sort of, take it as, well, that was included.And ANWR, one of the great potential fields anywhere in the world. (Applause.) And I never appreciated ANWR so much. A friend of mine called up, who’s in that world and in that business, and said, “Is it true that you’re thinking about ANWR?” I said, “Yeah, I think we’re going to get it, but you know.” He said, “Are you kidding? That’s the biggest thing, by itself.” He said, “Ronald Reagan and every President has wanted to get ANWR approved.”And after that, I said, “Oh, make sure that’s in the bill.” (Laughter.) It was amazing how that had an impact. That had a very big impact on me, Paul. I really didn’t care about it, and then when I heard that everybody wanted it—for 40 years, they’ve been trying to get it approved, and I said, “Make sure you don’t lose ANWR.” (Laughter.)But it’s great for the people of Alaska. And Senator Sullivan and Senator Murkowski are here someplace. Where are they? But they are very happy campers. Senator? (Applause.) Good, Senator. Thank you. They worked very—LEADER RYAN: And Don Young.THE PRESIDENT: Where’s Don Young? He’s such a quiet guy. Where Is Don? (Laughter.) Don Young, also. Don, thank you.AUDIENCE MEMBER: (Inaudible) all along.THE PRESIDENT: So—no, we were always going to get it. We never had a problem with it. But if you think about, that by itself is a big bill. The individual mandate by itself is a big, powerful bill. That was just added on to what we did with the massive tax cuts.I want to thank Senate Finance Chairman—and a very spectacular man—Orrin Hatch. (Applause.) Where’s Orrin? Orrin. Orrin is—I love listening to him speak. He said once, I am the single greatest President in his lifetime. Now, he’s a young man, so it’s not that much, but—(laughter). And he actually once said I’m the greatest President in the history of our country. And I said, “Does that include Lincoln and Washington?” He said, “Yes.” I said, “I love this guy.” (Laughter.) I love him. But he is, he’s a special guy.And House Ways and Means Chairman Kevin Brady for their incredible work. (Applause.) Kevin? Where are you, Kevin? That’s—what a job. I’d call Kevin night after night. “Kevin, what about this? What about that?” You were always there. He was working. What did you average sleep for about four weeks? About—maybe nothing? I think he had no average. But you did a great job. Nobody knows it better than you, Kevin. Thank you.Maybe we’ll do a phase two, I don’t know. We’ll do a phase two. Are you ready for that, Kevin? Huh? I think you’re ready. (Laughter.) We’ll get them even lower. But we are proud of you.Here in West Virginia, as a result of our tax cuts, the typical family of four will save roughly $2,000 a year. To lower tax rates for hardworking Americans, we nearly doubled the standard deduction for everyone. Now, the first $24,000 earned by a married couple is completely tax-free. And when I came into this beautiful building just a little while ago, one of the people said, “You know, I just got a check, and I have $221 more than I had last year at this time in my envelope.” (Applause.)And that one—really, that’s what we were waiting. We were waiting for February, and then we got hit with these corporations giving tremendous bonuses to everybody that Nancy Pelosi called “crumbs.” That was a bad—that could be like “deplorable.” Does that make sense? “Deplorable” and “crumbs”—those two words, they seem to have a resemblance. I hope it has the same meaning. But she called it crumbs, when people are getting $2,000 and $3,000 and $1,000. That’s not crumbs. That’s a lot of money.We also doubled the child tax credit, and that’s so helpful to so many. We’ve gone from one of the highest business tax rates anywhere in the world, to one of the most competitive—one of the lower ones—so that our great workers and companies can compete and win against anyone.We’ve now given them the tools to go out and win. And that’s what they’re doing. And they’re also pouring back. A lot of you folks, you saw Davos the other day, they’re coming back. I believe I brought hundreds of billions of dollars with me back from Europe, back from Switzerland, when I went there the other day to make a speech. They’re so excited about this country and what’s happening here. And they would never, ever have come.In fact, if the opposing party had won the election, you would have had tremendous new rules and regulations put on everything, and other things would have happened. And instead of going up almost 50 percent, your stock market, in my opinion, would have gone down 50 percent—I really believe that—because they were stifling it. They were getting prepared to stifle even worse than it was.The changes to our business tax alone are expected to raise average household income by $4,000. Roughly 3 million workers have already received tax cut bonuses and raises totaling thousands and thousands of dollars per worker—and that’s just over the past six weeks alone.Because of our tax cuts, Apple is investing $350 billion in the United States. They’re bringing $240 billion back—$240 billion. They’re going to pay a tax of $38 billion, Mitch—$38 billion. But they’re going to invest a total of $350 billion. And when I first heard the number, I said, “You don’t mean billion, you mean $350 million.” Because I’ve been saying to Tim Cook, “Tim, we got to build plants here.” You know, for $350 million, you could build a beautiful plant. But for $350 billion, they’re going to build a lot of plants. And this would have never happened without us and the work you’ve done. And they’re hiring 20,000 workers, by the way. (Applause.)And two days ago, ExxonMobil, in addition to many others, just announced that they are investing $50 billion in the United States. So the good news just keeps on rolling in, and it’s going to.And I want to thank Senator Tim Scott for “opportunity zones.” Our tax plan encourages this investment. Where is Tim? What a good guy Tim is. (Applause.) Tim. See him over there someplace? Thank you, Tim. But we’re investing in distressed communities to create more jobs for those who have too often been left behind. And Tim worked hard on that.We want every American to know the dignity of work, the pride of a paycheck, and the satisfaction of a job really well done. And we’re reaching our hand all across the aisle in pursuit of common ground and commonsense reforms for the good of all Americans. All Americans.We can reform our prison system to help those who have served their time get a second chance at life. And I’ve watched this, and I’ve seen it, and I’ve studied it. And people get out of prison, and they made a mistake. And not all—some are very bad, but many are very good. And they come home and they can’t get a job. It’s sad. They can’t—there’s—they can’t get a job.Now, the best thing we’ve done to fix that, Paul, is the fact that the economy is just booming. I mean, that fixes it better than any program we can do, anything we can do at all. But the economy is so strong now and so good, and so many companies are moving in that I really believe that problem—it’s a big problem—is going to solve itself. But we’re working on it.We can invest in workforce development, job training, and open new vocational schools, because we want every American to be able to reach their full God-given potential. Vocational schools—today you have community colleges and you have all of the—when I was growing up, we had vocational schools.And when I was going to school, I remember I was in high school, and there were people in class—one person in particular, he wasn’t, like, the greatest student. And—he just wasn’t. And yet, I saw him one day, and he was able to fix a car engine, blindfolded. And everybody else was saying that’s amazing how talented he is. He had a different kind of a talent. And we should have vocational schools. You learn mechanical, you learn bricklaying and carpentry, and all of these things. We don’t have that very much anymore.And I think the word “vocational” is a much better word than, in many cases, a community college. A lot of people don’t know what a community college means or represents. So we’re working very hard on vocational schools so that when all these companies move into this country, we’re going to have a workforce that knows exactly what they’re doing.In addition to that, when they move in, we’re giving them incentives to also train people themselves. Because, in many ways, that’s the best way to do it. In Wisconsin, we have a great company moving in. They make all of the Apple iPhones, and they’re going to have a big program. They’re going to have a tremendous program to teach people how to do this, because it’s a whole new skill. And it will be very successful.We can reduce the price of prescription drugs and ensure that terminally ill patients have a right to try. (Applause.) So important—right to try. You know, those drugs, they sit in there for 12, 13, 14 years. And a person is terminally ill, they have two months left, and under the old system they don’t want to give them even an experimental medicine because they’re afraid they’re going to be hurt. Well, they’re not going to be around for two months.So they’ll sign a waiver, and we’re going to give them the hope of finding something. You have people—and I’ve known people like this—they travel all over the world to try and find a cure. And we have great experimental drugs, but it will be years before they come on to the market.So it’s called Right to Try, and I hope you folks can approve it, and I hope you agree with it. But I think it’s so important. It’s so important. (Applause.) And Scott Gottlieb is heading it up. And it’s—and the other thing you get is you learn pretty quickly how effective it is; does it work. But you learn it really, very quickly. So, Right to Try.We can fix bad trade deals and negotiate new ones that are fair. And the most important word to me, on trade, is “reciprocal.” Because we have deals where companies will send in a motorbike, and we charge them nothing. But when we send a Harley-Davidson or a motorbike to those countries, they charge us 100 percent tax. That’s not fair. So they’ll send their motorbikes, or something, into us—zero. We send it to them—100 percent. That’s not fair trade. That’s not fair.So I like the word “reciprocal.” If they’re going to do it to us, we’re going to do it to them. And what’s going to happen is your numbers are going to either come down, or we’re going to make a lot of money. And either one is okay, as far as I’m concerned.We can rebuild our crumbling infrastructure, and we will; streamline the horrible approval process—roadways that take 12, 13, 14 years to get approved. We used to build them in three months, and now it takes years and years of approvals. We’re going to bring that down, ideally, to one year. Two years is our goal, but one year is our real goal. And we can get it done under budget, and we want to get it done ahead of schedule. Because you don’t have too many of them. Under budget and ahead of schedule.We can deliver for our police, our veterans, and our brave servicemembers. And finally, after decades of waiting, we can finally pass immigration reform that protects our country, defends our borders, and modernizes our immigration rules to serve the needs of American workers and of American families. So important.One of the strengths of the Republican Party is that we’re a big tent with many diverse views, but the one thing we can all agree on—and that’s that, in every decision, we make our highest priority to serve and to protect the American people.We want an immigration policy that’s fair, equitable, but that’s going to protect our people. We want people coming into our country based on merit and based on the fact that they are going to love our country, and they respect our people and our country. We don’t want visa lottery. Pick a lottery ticket. Pick a lottery. We don’t want that. So we want it based on merit. (Applause.)We have a chance now to pass into law the immigration reforms that the American people have been demanding for decades and that many of you have been working on for your entire careers. We have a great opportunity as a Republican Party. As the Republican Party, we have a great opportunity. We’re getting very little help from the Democrats, but I hope after I leave this room, we’re going to get a call from these people saying, “Let’s go.”You know, they talk a good game. We have to get help from the other side, or we have to elect many more Republicans. That’s another way of doing it. (Applause.) Really, that’s another way of doing it. And based on the numbers we just saw, we have a real chance of doing that. You know, ’18 is going to be very interesting. But we’ve got to do one or the other. Either they’re going to have to come on board—because they talk a good game with DACA, but they don’t produce.And so either they come on board, or we’re just going to have to really work and we’re going to have to get more people so we can get the kind of numbers that we need to pass, in a much easier fashion, legislation. And to get it done, we’ll all have to make some compromises along the way—to get it done this way. Now, to get it done the other way, if we win more, we don’t have to compromise so much. Okay? With the tax bill, we got what we wanted because we had, essentially, a unanimous vote.But we have to go, and we have to get it done and get it done properly, and we’re going to have to compromise—unless we elect more Republicans, in which case, we can have it just the way everybody in this room wants it. We have to be willing to give a little in order for our country to gain a whole lot.If we’re united, if we work together for the good of the nation, and we can fulfill our sacred duty to the country and to our incredible voters, we have really fulfilled a solemn promise.As you know, I have put forward an immigration framework based on many months of meeting and working with Tom Cotton, and working with John Cornyn, who was in the office the other day, and David Perdue—incredible people—and Bob Goodlatte, who’s out here someplace. Really incredible people. And it’s a strong bill, but it’s a very fair bill. And it protects our border. We have to protect our borders. (Applause.)It includes reforms that are overwhelmingly popular with the voters, including Democrats. The Democrats want to have—the real Democrats, they want to have their borders protected. But it includes Democrats, independents, Republicans. Americans want an immigration system that works for everybody. And they want safety.And, by the way, they also want a strong military. And we have to be very powerful on our military. You know, our military has been depleted over the last long period of time, even beyond Obama. It’s been depleted. We’ve got to build up. This should not be a party thing; this should be common sense. Without our military, we might not be here talking. We have to have a strong military.And I think we’re very much on our way. From the one standpoint, we’re going for funding, which we need, and I think we’ll get it. But we have a lot of fighting on that from the other side, and we can’t even think about it. We need a strong and powerful military. And we’re going to have far more powerful than we were ever before. (Applause.)Nearly 7 in 10 Americans support an immigration reform package that includes a permanent solution on DACA. And I’ve been hearing about DACA for so many years. Some people call it DREAMers. It’s not DREAMers. Don’t fall into that trap. It’s just much different than DREAMers. And I said the other night, you know, we have dreamers too. We have dreamers in this country, too. You can’t forget our dreamers. I have a lot of dreamers here. (Applause.)But DACA—we want to take care of DACA, and I hope we will. We need the support of the Democrats in order to do it, and they might not want to do it. They talk like they do, but I don’t think they do. But we’re going to find out very soon.We want something that is very, very tough and strong, in terms of the border. We need to end chain migration, and we need to cancel the terrible visa lottery. (Applause.)And those are the four pillars that I talked about the other night. We call them the White House framework—a plan that will finally bring our immigration system into the 21st Century.The Republican position on immigration is the center, mainstream view of the American people, with some extra strength at the border and security at the border added in. What we’re asking for and what the American people are pleading for is sanity and common sense in our immigration system. We want immigration rules that protect our communities, defend our security, and admit people who will love our country and contribute to our society.I know that the Senate is planning to bring an immigration bill on the floor, to the floor, in coming weeks. And I’m asking that the framework we submitted—with great flexibility, great flexibility, working with both parties—that something very positive will come out of it for our country, for everybody—for our country. And I think that can happen.If the Democrats choose to filibuster a framework that includes a generous path to citizenship or something that is not fair, we are not going to approve it. We’re just not going to approve it.So we’ll either have something that’s fair and equitable and good and secure, or we’re going to have nothing at all. And this has been going on for many years. It doesn’t make sense, however, to have nothing at all, because this is something that people want.So we will be demonstrating that we are very, very serious. One of the reasons I gave a number that was, I thought, a very generous number was because I wanted to see whether or not they were interested in approving that. Because if they don’t approve something within that sphere, that means, very simply, that they’re not looking to approve it at all. They want to use it for an election issue, but it’s now an election issue that will go to our benefit, not their benefit. (Applause.)But make no mistake: I will not rest until we have delivered for the citizens of our great country so many different things—immigration, the strong military. We’ve done an awfully good job of protecting our Second Amendment. That was in question during the campaign, you remember, and we have done a very, very good job. (Applause.)For the last 12 months, I have kept one promise after another, and we’re just getting started. So often I’ll see—and I must say, six, seven months ago, they were saying, he didn’t fulfill his promise on this or that. I said, I’ve only been here for four months. You know, other people were there for eight years and they would finally get something passed. I was there four months—you know this, Paul—and they were saying, “He didn’t fulfill a promise.”But now we’ve fulfilled far more promises than we promised. (Laughter.) And they’re having a hard time with that. We have seriously fulfilled promises. I call it “promises plus.” (Laughter.)And one of the things we’re doing that’s so important—and Mitch has worked so hard on, and Don, and everybody—is the justices, the judges all over the country. We’re filling up the courts with really talented people who understand and read the Constitution for what it says. (Applause.)So it’s really not talked about that much, but it is a tremendous impact. It’s having already a tremendous impact. And we have incredible people lined up—just lined up—that are getting ready to go into the courts. And, in many ways, Mitch, I think it’s going to be one of the most important things, if not the most important thing, that we’re doing.Defense is always the most. Got to be the most, John, right? But what we’re doing with the courts, I think, is going to go down as one of the greatest achievements, so I want to thank you for that. Thank you. (Applause.)And not only are we protecting America at home, we’re protecting our interests abroad. It’s time to finally end the dangerous defense sequester. It would be wonderful if we could go back to a budget—(applause)—in order to fully fund our military, and do it properly and order properly, and have it over a period of time, and do it the right way. So at some point, I hope, we’re going to be able to do that and it should work.And in order to defeat terrorists, we’re also asking Congress to ensure that we continue to have all necessary power and everything we need to defeat and detain the terrorists. We can’t treat terrorists like common criminals; they are really unlawful enemy combatants. (Applause.)When you see what they do and the way they do it, and the level of ferocity, we can’t treat them the way we do the ordinary criminal. And as you saw on Tuesday, I’ve signed an order keeping open our very secure detention facilities at Guantanamo Bay. (Applause.) It’s another promise kept.And there is one more very important promise we’re keeping: No longer are we making apologies for America. We don’t apologize anymore. (Applause.) We’re proud of our history, we’re confident in our values, and we’re grateful to our heroes, and we are determined to create a brighter future for all of our people. We are restoring the bonds of love and loyalty that unite us all, as friends, as neighbors, as citizens, as Americans. Because when Americans are united, nothing—nothing at all—nothing can stop us. We win. (Applause.)As I said the other night, we are a nation that built the Empire State Building in one year. Actually, to be exact, it was—we built it in less than a year. Would you believe it? Working 24 hours around the clock.We built the Hoover Dam in record time. We built the Golden Gate Bridge. We linked our nation together with railroads and highways. We dug out the Panama Canal. We’re the nation that won two World Wars, defeated fascism and communism, and put satellites into space and planted our great American flag on the face of the moon. We’ve healed the sick, cured disease, and cared for the poor like no other nation. We’ve lifted millions into prosperity, and delivered millions into freedom.This is our legacy. This is our birthright. And this is the foundation on which we build our very glorious future. Because together, we are, indeed, making America great again.Thank you, and God bless you all. Thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady of the United States, and my fellow Americans:Less than 1 year has passed since I first stood at this podium, in this majestic chamber, to speak on behalf of the American People—and to address their concerns, their hopes, and their dreams. That night, our new Administration had already taken swift action. A new tide of optimism was already sweeping across our land.Each day since, we have gone forward with a clear vision and a righteous mission—to make America great again for all Americans.Over the last year, we have made incredible progress and achieved extraordinary success. We have faced challenges we expected, and others we could never have imagined. We have shared in the heights of victory and the pains of hardship. We endured floods and fires and storms. But through it all, we have seen the beauty of America’s soul, and the steel in America’s spine.Each test has forged new American heroes to remind us who we are, and show us what we can be.We saw the volunteers of the “Cajun Navy,” racing to the rescue with their fishing boats to save people in the aftermath of a devastating hurricane.We saw strangers shielding strangers from a hail of gunfire on the Las Vegas strip.We heard tales of Americans like Coast Guard Petty Officer Ashlee Leppert, who is here tonight in the gallery with Melania. Ashlee was aboard one of the first helicopters on the scene in Houston during Hurricane Harvey. Through 18 hours of wind and rain, Ashlee braved live power lines and deep water, to help save more than 40 lives. Thank you, Ashlee.We heard about Americans like firefighter David Dahlberg. He is here with us too. David faced down walls of flame to rescue almost 60 children trapped at a California summer camp threatened by wildfires.To everyone still recovering in Texas, Florida, Louisiana, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, California, and everywhere else—we are with you, we love you, and we will pull through together.Some trials over the past year touched this chamber very personally. With us tonight is one of the toughest people ever to serve in this House—a guy who took a bullet, almost died, and was back to work three and a half months later: the legend from Louisiana, Congressman Steve Scalise.We are incredibly grateful for the heroic efforts of the Capitol Police Officers, the Alexandria Police, and the doctors, nurses, and paramedics who saved his life, and the lives of many others in this room.In the aftermath of that terrible shooting, we came together, not as Republicans or Democrats, but as representatives of the people. But it is not enough to come together only in times of tragedy. Tonight, I call upon all of us to set aside our differences, to seek out common ground, and to summon the unity we need to deliver for the people we were elected to serve.Over the last year, the world has seen what we always knew: that no people on Earth are so fearless, or daring, or determined as Americans. If there is a mountain, we climb it. If there is a frontier, we cross it. If there is a challenge, we tame it. If there is an opportunity, we seize it.So let us begin tonight by recognizing that the state of our Union is strong because our people are strong.And together, we are building a safe, strong, and proud America.Since the election, we have created 2.4 million new jobs, including 200,000 new jobs in manufacturing alone. After years of wage stagnation, we are finally seeing rising wages.Unemployment claims have hit a 45-year low. African American unemployment stands at the lowest rate ever recorded, and Hispanic American unemployment has also reached the lowest levels in history.Small business confidence is at an all-time high. The stock market has smashed one record after another, gaining $8 trillion in value. That is great news for Americans’ 401k, retirement, pension, and college savings accounts.And just as I promised the American people from this podium 11 months ago, we enacted the biggest tax cuts and reforms in American history.Our massive tax cuts provide tremendous relief for the middle class and small businesses.To lower tax rates for hardworking Americans, we nearly doubled the standard deduction for everyone. Now, the first $24,000 earned by a married couple is completely tax-free. We also doubled the child tax credit.A typical family of four making $75,000 will see their tax bill reduced by $2,000k—slashing their tax bill in half.This April will be the last time you ever file under the old broken system—and millions of Americans will have more take-home pay starting next month.We eliminated an especially cruel tax that fell mostly on Americans making less than $50,000 a year—forcing them to pay tremendous penalties simply because they could not afford government-ordered health plans. We repealed the core of disastrous Obamacare—the individual mandate is now gone.We slashed the business tax rate from 35 percent all the way down to 21 percent, so American companies can compete and win against anyone in the world. These changes alone are estimated to increase average family income by more than $4,000.Small businesses have also received a massive tax cut, and can now deduct 20 percent of their business income.Here tonight are Steve Staub and Sandy Keplinger of Staub Manufacturing—a small business in Ohio. They have just finished the best year in their 20-year history. Because of tax reform, they are handing out raises, hiring an additional 14 people, and expanding into the building next door.One of Staub’s employees, Corey Adams, is also with us tonight. Corey is an all-American worker. He supported himself through high school, lost his job during the 2008 recession, and was later hired by Staub, where he trained to become a welder. Like many hardworking Americans, Corey plans to invest his tax‑cut raise into his new home and his two daughters’ education. Please join me in congratulating Corey.Since we passed tax cuts, roughly 3 million workers have already gotten tax cut bonuses—many of them thousands of dollars per worker. Apple has just announced it plans to invest a total of $350 billion in America, and hire another 20,000 workers.This is our new American moment. There has never been a better time to start living the American Dream.So to every citizen watching at home tonight—no matter where you have been, or where you come from, this is your time. If you work hard, if you believe in yourself, if you believe in America, then you can dream anything, you can be anything, and together, we can achieve anything.Tonight, I want to talk about what kind of future we are going to have, and what kind of Nation we are going to be. All of us, together, as one team, one people, and one American family.We all share the same home, the same heart, the same destiny, and the same great American flag.Together, we are rediscovering the American way.In America, we know that faith and family, not government and bureaucracy, are the center of the American life. Our motto is “in God we trust.”And we celebrate our police, our military, and our amazing veterans as heroes who deserve our total and unwavering support.Here tonight is Preston Sharp, a 12-year-old boy from Redding, California, who noticed that veterans’ graves were not marked with flags on Veterans Day. He decided to change that, and started a movement that has now placed 40,000 flags at the graves of our great heroes. Preston: a job well done.Young patriots like Preston teach all of us about our civic duty as Americans. Preston’s reverence for those who have served our Nation reminds us why we salute our flag, why we put our hands on our hearts for the pledge of allegiance, and why we proudly stand for the national anthem.Americans love their country. And they deserve a Government that shows them the same love and loyalty in return.For the last year we have sought to restore the bonds of trust between our citizens and their Government.Working with the Senate, we are appointing judges who will interpret the Constitution as written, including a great new Supreme Court Justice, and more circuit court judges than any new administration in the history of our country.We are defending our Second Amendment, and have taken historic actions to protect religious liberty.And we are serving our brave veterans, including giving our veterans choice in their healthcare decisions. Last year, the Congress passed, and I signed, the landmark VA Accountability Act. Since its passage, my Administration has already removed more than 1,500 VA employees who failed to give our veterans the care they deserve—and we are hiring talented people who love our vets as much as we do.I will not stop until our veterans are properly taken care of, which has been my promise to them from the very beginning of this great journey.All Americans deserve accountability and respect—and that is what we are giving them. So tonight, I call on the Congress to empower every Cabinet Secretary with the authority to reward good workers—and to remove Federal employees who undermine the public trust or fail the American people.In our drive to make Washington accountable, we have eliminated more regulations in our first year than any administration in history.We have ended the war on American Energy—and we have ended the war on clean coal. We are now an exporter of energy to the world.In Detroit, I halted Government mandates that crippled America’s autoworkers—so we can get the Motor City revving its engines once again.Many car companies are now building and expanding plants in the United States—something we have not seen for decades. Chrysler is moving a major plant from Mexico to Michigan; Toyota and Mazda are opening up a plant in Alabama. Soon, plants will be opening up all over the country. This is all news Americans are unaccustomed to hearing—for many years, companies and jobs were only leaving us. But now they are coming back.Exciting progress is happening every day.To speed access to breakthrough cures and affordable generic drugs, last year the FDA approved more new and generic drugs and medical devices than ever before in our history.We also believe that patients with terminal conditions should have access to experimental treatments that could potentially save their lives.People who are terminally ill should not have to go from country to country to seek a cure—I want to give them a chance right here at home. It is time for the Congress to give these wonderful Americans the “right to try.”One of my greatest priorities is to reduce the price of prescription drugs. In many other countries, these drugs cost far less than what we pay in the United States. That is why Ihave directed my Administration to make fixing the injustice of high drug prices one of our top priorities. Prices will come down.America has also finally turned the page on decades of unfair trade deals that sacrificed our prosperity and shipped away our companies, our jobs, and our Nation’s wealth.The era of economic surrender is over.From now on, we expect trading relationships to be fair and to be reciprocal.We will work to fix bad trade deals and negotiate new ones.And we will protect American workers and American intellectual property, through strong enforcement of our trade rules.As we rebuild our industries, it is also time to rebuild our crumbling infrastructure.America is a nation of builders. We built the Empire State Building in just 1 year—is it not a disgrace that it can now take 10 years just to get a permit approved for a simple road?I am asking both parties to come together to give us the safe, fast, reliable, and modern infrastructure our economy needs and our people deserve.Tonight, I am calling on the Congress to produce a bill that generates at least $1.5 trillion for the new infrastructure investment we need.Every Federal dollar should be leveraged by partnering with State and local governments and, where appropriate, tapping into private sector investment—to permanently fix the infrastructure deficit.Any bill must also streamline the permitting and approval process—getting it down to no more than two years, and perhaps even one.Together, we can reclaim our building heritage. We will build gleaming new roads, bridges, highways, railways, and waterways across our land. And we will do it with American heart, American hands, and American grit.We want every American to know the dignity of a hard day’s work. We want every child to be safe in their home at night. And we want every citizen to be proud of this land that we love.We can lift our citizens from welfare to work, from dependence to independence, and from poverty to prosperity.As tax cuts create new jobs, let us invest in workforce development and job training. Let us open great vocational schools so our future workers can learn a craft and realize their full potential. And let us support working families by supporting paid family leave.As America regains its strength, this opportunity must be extended to all citizens. That is why this year we will embark on reforming our prisons to help former inmates who have served their time get a second chance.Struggling communities, especially immigrant communities, will also be helped by immigration policies that focus on the best interests of American workers and American families.For decades, open borders have allowed drugs and gangs to pour into our most vulnerable communities. They have allowed millions of low-wage workers to compete for jobs and wages against the poorest Americans. Most tragically, they have caused the loss of many innocent lives.Here tonight are two fathers and two mothers: Evelyn Rodriguez, Freddy Cuevas, Elizabeth Alvarado, and Robert Mickens. Their two teenage daughters—Kayla Cuevas and Nisa Mickens—were close friends on Long Island. But in September 2016, on the eve of Nisa’s 16th Birthday, neither of them came home. These two precious girls were brutally murdered while walking together in their hometown. Six members of the savage gang MS-13 have been charged with Kayla and Nisa’s murders. Many of these gang members took advantage of glaring loopholes in our laws to enter the country as unaccompanied alien minors—and wound up in Kayla and Nisa’s high school.Evelyn, Elizabeth, Freddy, and Robert: Tonight, everyone in this chamber is praying for you. Everyone in America is grieving for you. And 320 million hearts are breaking for you. We cannot imagine the depth of your sorrow, but we can make sure that other families never have to endure this pain.Tonight, I am calling on the Congress to finally close the deadly loopholes that have allowed MS-13, and other criminals, to break into our country. We have proposed new legislation that will fix our immigration laws, and support our ICE and Border Patrol Agents, so that this cannot ever happen again.The United States is a compassionate nation. We are proud that we do more than any other country to help the needy, the struggling, and the underprivileged all over the world. But as President of the United States, my highest loyalty, my greatest compassion, and my constant concern is for America’s children, America’s struggling workers, and America’s forgotten communities. I want our youth to grow up to achieve great things. I want our poor to have their chance to rise.So tonight, I am extending an open hand to work with members of both parties—Democrats and Republicans—to protect our citizens of every background, color, religion, and creed. My duty, and the sacred duty of every elected official in this chamber, is to defend Americans—to protect their safety, their families, their communities, and their right to the American Dream. Because Americans are dreamers too.Here tonight is one leader in the effort to defend our country: Homeland Security Investigations Special Agent Celestino Martinez—he goes by CJ. CJ served 15 years in the Air Force before becoming an ICE agent and spending the last 15 years fighting gang violence and getting dangerous criminals off our streets. At one point, MS-13 leaders ordered CJ’s murder. But he did not cave to threats or fear. Last May, he commanded an operation to track down gang members on Long Island. His team has arrested nearly 400, including more than 220 from MS-13.CJ: Great work. Now let us get the Congress to send you some reinforcements.Over the next few weeks, the House and Senate will be voting on an immigration reform package.In recent months, my Administration has met extensively with both Democrats and Republicans to craft a bipartisan approach to immigration reform. Based on these discussions, we presented the Congress with a detailed proposal that should be supported by both parties as a fair compromise—one where nobody gets everything they want, but where our country gets the critical reforms it needs.Here are the four pillars of our plan:The first pillar of our framework generously offers a path to citizenship for 1.8 million illegal immigrants who were brought here by their parents at a young age—that covers almost three times more people than the previous administration. Under our plan, those who meet education and work requirements, and show good moral character, will be able to become full citizens of the United States.The second pillar fully secures the border. That means building a wall on the Southern border, and it means hiring more heroes like CJ to keep our communities safe. Crucially, our plan closes the terrible loopholes exploited by criminals and terrorists to enter our country—and it finally ends the dangerous practice of “catch and release.”The third pillar ends the visa lottery—a program that randomly hands out green cards without any regard for skill, merit, or the safety of our people. It is time to begin moving towards a merit-based immigration system—one that admits people who are skilled, who want to work, who will contribute to our society, and who will love and respect our country.The fourth and final pillar protects the nuclear family by ending chain migration. Under the current broken system, a single immigrant can bring in virtually unlimited numbers of distant relatives. Under our plan, we focus on the immediate family by limiting sponsorships to spouses and minor children. This vital reform is necessary, not just for our economy, but for our security, and our future.In recent weeks, two terrorist attacks in New York were made possible by the visa lottery and chain migration. In the age of terrorism, these programs present risks we can no longer afford.It is time to reform these outdated immigration rules, and finally bring our immigration system into the 21st century.These four pillars represent a down-the-middle compromise, and one that will create a safe, modern, and lawful immigration system.For over 30 years, Washington has tried and failed to solve this problem. This Congress can be the one that finally makes it happen.Most importantly, these four pillars will produce legislation that fulfills my ironclad pledge to only sign a bill that puts America first. So let us come together, set politics aside, and finally get the job done.These reforms will also support our response to the terrible crisis of opioid and drug addiction.In 2016, we lost 64,000 Americans to drug overdoses: 174 deaths per day. Seven per hour. We must get much tougher on drug dealers and pushers if we are going to succeed in stopping this scourge.My Administration is committed to fighting the drug epidemic and helping get treatment for those in need. The struggle will be long and difficult—but, as Americans always do, we will prevail.As we have seen tonight, the most difficult challenges bring out the best in America.We see a vivid expression of this truth in the story of the Holets family of New Mexico. Ryan Holets is 27 years old, and an officer with the Albuquerque Police Department. He is here tonight with his wife Rebecca. Last year, Ryan was on duty when he saw a pregnant, homeless woman preparing to inject heroin. When Ryan told her she was going to harm her unborn child, she began to weep. She told him she did not know where to turn, but badly wanted a safe home for her baby.In that moment, Ryan said he felt God speak to him: “You will do it—because you can.” He took out a picture of his wife and their four kids. Then, he went home to tell his wife Rebecca. In an instant, she agreed to adopt. The Holets named their new daughter Hope.Ryan and Rebecca: You embody the goodness of our Nation. Thank you, and congratulations.As we rebuild America’s strength and confidence at home, we are also restoring our strength and standing abroad.Around the world, we face rogue regimes, terrorist groups, and rivals like China and Russia that challenge our interests, our economy, and our values. In confronting these dangers, we know that weakness is the surest path to conflict, and unmatched power is the surest means of our defense.For this reason, I am asking the Congress to end the dangerous defense sequester and fully fund our great military.As part of our defense, we must modernize and rebuild our nuclear arsenal, hopefully never having to use it, but making it so strong and powerful that it will deter any acts of aggression. Perhaps someday in the future there will be a magical moment when the countries of the world will get together to eliminate their nuclear weapons. Unfortunately, we are not there yet.Last year, I also pledged that we would work with our allies to extinguish ISIS from the face of the Earth. One year later, I am proud to report that the coalition to defeat ISIS has liberated almost 100 percent of the territory once held by these killers in Iraq and Syria. But there is much more work to be done. We will continue our fight until ISIS is defeated.Army Staff Sergeant Justin Peck is here tonight. Near Raqqa last November, Justin and his comrade, Chief Petty Officer Kenton Stacy, were on a mission to clear buildings that ISIS had rigged with explosives so that civilians could return to the city.Clearing the second floor of a vital hospital, Kenton Stacy was severely wounded by an explosion. Immediately, Justin bounded into the booby-trapped building and found Kenton in bad shape. He applied pressure to the wound and inserted a tube to reopen an airway. He then performed CPR for 20 straight minutes during the ground transport and maintained artificial respiration through 2 hours of emergency surgery.Kenton Stacy would have died if not for Justin’s selfless love for a fellow warrior. Tonight, Kenton is recovering in Texas. Raqqa is liberated. And Justin is wearing his new Bronze Star, with a “V” for “Valor.” Staff Sergeant Peck: All of America salutes you.Terrorists who do things like place bombs in civilian hospitals are evil. When possible, we annihilate them. When necessary, we must be able to detain and question them. But we must be clear: Terrorists are not merely criminals. They are unlawful enemy combatants. And when captured overseas, they should be treated like the terrorists they are.In the past, we have foolishly released hundreds of dangerous terrorists, only to meet them again on the battlefield—including the ISIS leader, al-Baghdadi.So today, I am keeping another promise. I just signed an order directing Secretary Mattis to reexamine our military detention policy and to keep open the detention facilities at Guantánamo Bay.I am also asking the Congress to ensure that, in the fight against ISIS and al-Qa’ida, we continue to have all necessary power to detain terrorists—wherever we chase them down.Our warriors in Afghanistan also have new rules of engagement. Along with their heroic Afghan partners, our military is no longer undermined by artificial timelines, and we no longer tell our enemies our plans.Last month, I also took an action endorsed unanimously by the Senate just months before: I recognized Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.Shortly afterwards, dozens of countries voted in the United Nations General Assembly against America’s sovereign right to make this recognition. American taxpayers generously send those same countries billions of dollars in aid every year.That is why, tonight, I am asking the Congress to pass legislation to help ensure American foreign-assistance dollars always serve American interests, and only go to America’s friends.As we strengthen friendships around the world, we are also restoring clarity about our adversaries.When the people of Iran rose up against the crimes of their corrupt dictatorship, I did not stay silent. America stands with the people of Iran in their courageous struggle for freedom.I am asking the Congress to address the fundamental flaws in the terrible Iran nuclear deal.My administration has also imposed tough sanctions on the communist and socialist dictatorships in Cuba and Venezuela.But no regime has oppressed its own citizens more totally or brutally than the cruel dictatorship in North Korea.North Korea’s reckless pursuit of nuclear missiles could very soon threaten our homeland.We are waging a campaign of maximum pressure to prevent that from happening.Past experience has taught us that complacency and concessions only invite aggression and provocation. I will not repeat the mistakes of past administrations that got us into this dangerous position.We need only look at the depraved character of the North Korean regime to understand the nature of the nuclear threat it could pose to America and our allies.Otto Warmbier was a hardworking student at the University of Virginia. On his way to study abroad in Asia, Otto joined a tour to North Korea. At its conclusion, this wonderful young man was arrested and charged with crimes against the state. After a shameful trial, the dictatorship sentenced Otto to 15 years of hard labor, before returning him to America last June—horribly injured and on the verge of death. He passed away just days after his return.Otto’s Parents, Fred and Cindy Warmbier, are with us tonight—along with Otto’s brother and sister, Austin and Greta. You are powerful witnesses to a menace that threatens our world, and your strength inspires us all. Tonight, we pledge to honor Otto’s memory with American resolve.Finally, we are joined by one more witness to the ominous nature of this regime. His name is Mr. Ji Seong-ho.In 1996, Seong-ho was a starving boy in North Korea. One day, he tried to steal coal from a railroad car to barter for a few scraps of food. In the process, he passed out on the train tracks, exhausted from hunger. He woke up as a train ran over his limbs. He then endured multiple amputations without anything to dull the pain. His brother and sister gave what little food they had to help him recover and ate dirt themselves—permanently stunting their own growth. Later, he was tortured by North Korean authorities after returning from a brief visit to China. His tormentors wanted to know if he had met any Christians. He had—and he resolved to be free.Seong-ho traveled thousands of miles on crutches across China and Southeast Asia to freedom. Most of his family followed. His father was caught trying to escape, and was tortured to death.Today he lives in Seoul, where he rescues other defectors, and broadcasts into North Korea what the regime fears the most—the truth.Today he has a new leg, but Seong-ho, I understand you still keep those crutches as a reminder of how far you have come. Your great sacrifice is an inspiration to us all.Seong-ho’s story is a testament to the yearning of every human soul to live in freedom.It was that same yearning for freedom that nearly 250 years ago gave birth to a special place called America. It was a small cluster of colonies caught between a great ocean and a vast wilderness. But it was home to an incredible people with a revolutionary idea: that they could rule themselves. That they could chart their own destiny. And that, together, they could light up the world.That is what our country has always been about. That is what Americans have always stood for, always strived for, and always done.Atop the dome of this Capitol stands the Statue of Freedom. She stands tall and dignified among the monuments to our ancestors who fought and lived and died to protect her.Monuments to Washington and Jefferson—to Lincoln and King.Memorials to the heroes of Yorktown and Saratoga—to young Americans who shed their blood on the shores of Normandy, and the fields beyond. And others, who went down in the waters of the Pacific and the skies over Asia.And freedom stands tall over one more monument: this one. This Capitol. This living monument to the American people.A people whose heroes live not only in the past, but all around us—defending hope, pride, and the American way.They work in every trade. They sacrifice to raise a family. They care for our children at home. They defend our flag abroad. They are strong moms and brave kids. They are firefighters, police officers, border agents, medics, and Marines.But above all else, they are Americans. And this Capitol, this city, and this Nation, belong to them.Our task is to respect them, to listen to them, to serve them, to protect them, and to always be worthy of them.Americans fill the world with art and music. They push the bounds of science and discovery. And they forever remind us of what we should never forget: The people dreamed this country. The people built this country. And it is the people who are making America great again.As long as we are proud of who we are, and what we are fighting for, there is nothing we cannot achieve.As long as we have confidence in our values, faith in our citizens, and trust in our God, we will not fail.Our families will thrive.Our people will prosper.And our Nation will forever be safe and strong and proud and mighty and free.Thank you, and God bless America.THE WHITE HOUSE,January 30, 2018. PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you, Klaus, very much. It’s a privilege to be here at this forum where leaders in business, science, art, diplomacy, and world affairs have gathered for many, many years to discuss how we can advance prosperity, security, and peace.I’m here today to represent the interests of the American people and to affirm America’s friendship and partnership in building a better world.Like all nations represented at this great forum, America hopes for a future in which everyone can prosper, and every child can grow up free from violence, poverty, and fear.Over the past year, we have made extraordinary strides in the U.S. We’re lifting up forgotten communities, creating exciting new opportunities, and helping every American find their path to the American Dream—the dream of a great job, a safe home, and a better life for their children.After years of stagnation, the United States is once again experiencing strong economic growth. The stock market is smashing one record after another, and has added more than $7 trillion in new wealth since my election. Consumer confidence, business confidence, and manufacturing confidence are the highest they have been in many decades.Since my election, we’ve created 2.4 million jobs, and that number is going up very, very substantially. Small-business optimism is at an all-time high. New unemployment claims are near the lowest we’ve seen in almost half a century. African American unemployment has reached the lowest rate ever recorded in the United States, and so has unemployment among Hispanic Americans.The world is witnessing the resurgence of a strong and prosperous America. I’m here to deliver a simple message: There has never been a better time to hire, to build, to invest, and to grow in the United States. America is open for business, and we are competitive once again.The American economy is by far the largest in the world, and we’ve just enacted the most significant tax cuts and reform in American history. We’ve massively cut taxes for the middle class and small businesses to let working families keep more of their hard-earned money. We lowered our corporate tax rate from 35 percent, all the way down to 21 percent. As a result, millions of workers have received tax cut bonuses from their employers in amounts as large as $3,000.The tax cut bill is expected to raise the average American’s household income by more than $4,000. The world’s largest company, Apple, announced plans to bring $245 billion in overseas profits home to America. Their total investment into the United States economy will be more than $350 billion over the next five years.Now is the perfect time to bring your business, your jobs, and your investments to the United States. This is especially true because we have undertaken the most extensive regulatory reduction ever conceived. Regulation is stealth taxation. The U.S., like many other countries, unelected bureaucrats—and we have—believe me, we have them all over the place—and they’ve imposed crushing and anti-business and anti-worker regulations on our citizens with no vote, no legislative debate, and no real accountability.In America, those days are over. I pledged to eliminate two unnecessary regulations for every one new regulation. We have succeeded beyond our highest expectations. Instead of 2 for 1, we have cut 22 burdensome regulations for every 1 new rule. We are freeing our businesses and workers so they can thrive and flourish as never before.We are creating an environment that attracts capital, invites investment, and rewards production.America is the place to do business. So come to America, where you can innovate, create, and build. I believe in America. As President of the United States, I will always put America first, just like the leaders of other countries should put their country first also.But America first does not mean America alone. When the United States grows, so does the world. American prosperity has created countless jobs all around the globe, and the drive for excellence, creativity, and innovation in the U.S. has led to important discoveries that help people everywhere live more prosperous and far healthier lives.As the United States pursues domestic reforms to unleash jobs and growth, we are also working to reform the international trading system so that it promotes broadly shared prosperity and rewards to those who play by the rules.We cannot have free and open trade if some countries exploit the system at the expense of others. We support free trade, but it needs to be fair and it needs to be reciprocal. Because, in the end, unfair trade undermines us all.The United States will no longer turn a blind eye to unfair economic practices, including massive intellectual property theft, industrial subsidies, and pervasive state-led economic planning. These and other predatory behaviors are distorting the global markets and harming businesses and workers, not just in the U.S., but around the globe.Just like we expect the leaders of other countries to protect their interests, as President of the United States, I will always protect the interests of our country, our companies, and our workers.We will enforce our trade laws and restore integrity to our trading system. Only by insisting on fair and reciprocal trade can we create a system that works not just for the U.S. but for all nations.As I have said, the United States is prepared to negotiate mutually beneficial, bilateral trade agreements with all countries. This will include the countries in TPP, which are very important. We have agreements with several of them already. We would consider negotiating with the rest, either individually, or perhaps as a group, if it is in the interests of all.My administration is also taking swift action in other ways to restore American confidence and independence. We are lifting self-imposed restrictions on energy production to provide affordable power to our citizens and businesses, and to promote energy security for our friends all around the world. No country should be held hostage to a single provider of energy.America is roaring back, and now is the time to invest in the future of America. We have dramatically cut taxes to make America competitive. We are eliminating burdensome regulations at a record pace. We are reforming the bureaucracy to make it lean, responsive, and accountable. And we are ensuring our laws are enforced fairly.We have the best colleges and universities in the world, and we have the best workers in the world. Energy is abundant and affordable. There has never been a better time to come to America.We are also making historic investments in the American military because we cannot have prosperity without security. To make the world safer from rogue regimes, terrorism, and revisionist powers, we are asking our friends and allies to invest in their own defenses and to meet their financial obligations. Our common security requires everyone to contribute their fair share.My administration is proud to have led historic efforts, at the United Nations Security Council and all around the world, to unite all civilized nations in our campaign of maximum pressure to de-nuke the Korean Peninsula. We continue to call on partners to confront Iran’s support for terrorists and block Iran’s path to a nuclear weapon.We’re also working with allies and partners to destroy jihadist terrorist organizations such as ISIS, and very successfully so. The United States is leading a very broad coalition to deny terrorists control of their territory and populations, to cut off their funding, and to discredit their wicked ideology.I am pleased to report that the coalition to defeat ISIS has retaken almost 100 percent of the territory once held by these killers in Iraq and Syria.There is still more fighting and work to be done and to consolidate our gains.We are committed to ensuring that Afghanistan never again becomes a safe haven for terrorists who want to commit mass murder to our civilian populations.I want to thank those nations represented here today that have joined in these crucial efforts. You are not just securing your own citizens, but saving lives and restoring hope for millions and millions of people.When it comes to terrorism, we will do whatever is necessary to protect our nation. We will defend our citizens and our borders. We are also securing our immigration system, as a matter of both national and economic security.America is a cutting-edge economy, but our immigration system is stuck in the past. We must replace our current system of extended-family chain migration with a merit-based system of admissions that selects new arrivals based on their ability to contribute to our economy, to support themselves financially, and to strengthen our country.In rebuilding America, we are also fully committed to developing our workforce. We are lifting people from dependence to independence, because we know the single best anti-poverty program is a very simple and very beautiful paycheck.To be successful, it is not enough to invest in our economy. We must invest in our people. When people are forgotten, the world becomes fractured. Only by hearing and responding to the voices of the forgotten can we create a bright future that is truly shared by all.The nation’s greatness is more than the sum of its production. A nation’s greatness is the sum of its citizens: the values, pride, love, devotion, and character of the people who call that nation home.From my first international G7 Summit, to the G20, to the U.N. General Assembly, to APEC, to the World Trade Organization, and today at the World Economic Forum, my administration has not only been present, but has driven our message that we are all stronger when free, sovereign nations cooperate toward shared goals and they cooperate toward shared dreams.Represented in this room are some of the remarkable citizens from all over the world. You are national leaders, business titans, industry giants, and many of the brightest minds in many fields.Each of you has the power to change hearts, transform lives, and shape your countries’ destinies.With this power comes an obligation, however —a duty of loyalty to the people, workers, and customers who have made you who you are.So together, let us resolve to use our power, our resources, and our voices, not just for ourselves, but for our people —to lift their burdens, to raise their hopes, and to empower their dreams; to protect their families, their communities, their histories, and their futures.That’s what we’re doing in America, and the results are totally unmistakable. It’s why new businesses and investment are flooding in. It’s why our unemployment rate is the lowest it’s been in so many decades.It’s why America’s future has never been brighter.Today, I am inviting all of you to become part of this incredible future we are building together.Thank you to our hosts, thank you to the leaders and innovators in the audience. But most importantly, thank you to all of the hardworking men and women who do their duty each and every day, making this a better world for everyone. Together, let us send our love and our gratitude to make them, because they really make our countries run. They make our countries great.Thank you, and God bless you all. Thank you very much. (Applause.) Thank you very much.MR. SCHWAB: Thank you, Mr. President, for this inspiring speech. As it is tradition at the forum, I will ask you one or two questions.And my first question is, why is the tax reform —why has it been of such a high priority for your administration?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Well, first of all, Klaus, I want to congratulate you. This is an incredible group of people. We had dinner last night with about 15 leaders of industry, none of whom I knew, but all of whom I’ve read about for years. And it was truly an incredible group. But I think I have 15 new friends. So this has been really great what you’ve done and putting it together, the economic forum.The tax reform was a dream of a lot of people over many years, but they weren’t able to get it done. Many people tried, and Ronald Reagan was really the last to make a meaningful cut and reform. And ours is cutting and reforming. We emphasize cut, but the reform is probably almost as important. We’ve wanted to do it. It is very tough, politically, to do it. Hard to believe that would be, but it is very, very tough. That’s why it hasn’t been done in close to 40 years.And once we got it going, it was going. And the big—and I wouldn’t say a total surprise, but one of the big things that happened and took place is AT&amp;T and some others came out very early and they said they were going to pay thousands and thousands of dollars to people that work for their companies. And you have 300,000, 400,000, 500,000 people working for these companies, and all of a sudden it became like a big waterfall, a big, beautiful waterfall where so many companies are doing it. And even today they just announced many more. But every day they announce more and more. And now it’s a fight for who’s going to give the most. It started at 1,000, and now we have them up to 3,000.This is something that we didn’t anticipate. Oftentimes in business, things happen that you don’t anticipate. Usually that’s a bad thing, but this was a good thing. This came out of nowhere. Nobody ever thought of this as a possibility even. It wasn’t in the equation. We waited—we said, wait until February 1st when the checks start coming in. And people, Klaus, have a lot more money in their paycheck—because it’s not just a little money, this is a lot of money for people making a living doing whatever they may be doing.And we really though February 1st it was going to kick in and everybody was going to be—well, we haven’t even gotten there yet and it’s kicked in. And it’s had an incredible impact on the stock market and the stock prices. We’ve set 84 records since my election—record stock market prices, meaning we hit new highs 84 different times out of a one-year period. And that’s a great thing. And in all fairness, that was done before we passed the tax cuts and tax reform.So what happened is really something special. Then, as you know, and as I just said, Apple came in with $350 billion. And I tell you, I spoke with Tim Cook; I said, Tim, I will never consider this whole great run that we’ve made complete until you start building plants in the U.S. And I will tell you, this moved up very substantially. But when I heard 350, I thought he was talking—I thought they were talking $350 million. And, by the way, that’s a nice-sized plant. Not the greatest, but not bad. And they said, “No, sir. It’s $350 billion.” I said, that is something.Well, we have tremendous amounts of money, including my newfound friends from last night —great companies. They’re all investing. When one of the gentlemen said he’s putting in $2 billion because of the tax cuts, I said to myself, “Wow, he’s actually the cheap one in the group” —because they’re putting in massive numbers of billions of dollars.So I think you have a brand-new United States. You have a United States where people from all over the world are looking to come in and invest, and there’s just nothing like what’s happening.And I just want to finish by —I have a group of people that have been so —I have a whole lot of them, so I won’t introduce because then I’ll insult at least half of them. But I’ve had a group of people that worked so hard on this and other things.And we’re really doing —we had a great first year —so successful in so many different ways. And there’s a tremendous spirit. When you look at all of the different charts and polls, and you see, as an example, African American unemployment at the historic low—it’s never had a period of time like this. Same with Hispanic. Women at a 17-year low. It’s very heartwarming to see. But there’s a tremendous spirit in the United States. I would say it’s a spirit like I have never witnessed before. I’ve been here for awhile. I have never witnessed the spirit that our country has right now.So I just want to thank you all, and all those that are pouring billions of dollars into our country, or ten dollars into our country, we thank you very much. Thank you.MR. SCHWAB: Mr. President, I will ask you, maybe, a personal question. But before doing so, I’d just like to—PRESIDENT TRUMP: Sounds very interesting.MR. SCHWAB: —acknowledge that—PRESIDENT TRUMP: I didn’t know about this one.MR. SCHWAB: I would like to acknowledge the strong presence of your Cabinet membersPRESIDENT TRUMP: Yes.MR. SCHWAB: —who tremendously contributed to the discussions the last (inaudible).PRESIDENT TRUMP: Good, I would like to do that. That’s very nice.MR. SCHWAB: Yeah. Now—PRESIDENT TRUMP: Steven, Wilbur, Gary, Robert, even my General and my various other generals, you know. We’re making our military protection a little bit better for us too. So thank you very much. Does everybody understand that? I think so. Thank you all for being here.MR. SCHWAB: Now my, maybe personal, question would be: What experience from your past have been most useful in preparing you for the presidency?PRESIDENT TRUMP: Well, being a businessman has been a great experience for me. I’ve loved it. I’ve always loved business. I’ve always been good at building things, and I’ve always been successful at making money. I’d buy things that would fail—that would be failures—and I’d turn them around and try and get them for the right price, and then I’d turn them around and make them successful. And I’ve been good at it. And that takes a certain ability.And, you know, historically, I guess, there’s never really been a businessman or businessperson elected president. It’s always been a general or a politician. Throughout history, it’s always been a general —you had to be a general —but mostly it was politicians. You never have a businessman.And then, in all fairness, I was saying to Klaus last night: Had the opposing party to me won—some of whom you backed, some of the people in the room—instead of being up almost 50 percent—the stock market is up since my election almost 50 percent—rather than that, I believe the stock market from that level, the initial level, would have been down close to 50 percent. That’s where we were heading. I really believe that—because they were going to put on massive new regulations. You couldn’t breathe. It was choking our country to death. And I was able to see that, Klaus, as a businessperson.The other thing is, I’ve always seemed to get, for whatever reason, a disproportionate amount of press or media. (Laughter.) Throughout my whole life—somebody will explain someday why—but I’ve always gotten a lot. (Laughter.) And as businessman I was always treated really well by the press. The numbers speak and things happen, but I’ve always really had a very good press. And it wasn’t until I became a politician that I realized how nasty, how mean, how vicious, and how fake the press can be. As the cameras start going off in the background. (Laughter.)But overall—I mean, the bottom line—somebody said, well, they couldn’t have been that bad because here we are—we’re president. And I think we’re doing a really great job with my team. I have a team of just tremendous people, and I think we’re doing a very special job. And I really believe it was time, and it was time to do that job, because I don’t think the United States would have done very well if it went through four or eight more years of regulation and, really, a very anti-business group of people.We have a very pro-business group. We have regulations cut to a level—in the history of our country, Klaus—this was reported recently. In one year we’ve cut more regulations in my administration than any other administration in four, eight, or sixteen years, in the one case. We’ve cut more regulations in one year, and we have a ways to go. I mean, we’re probably 50 percent done.And we’re going to have regulation. There’s nothing wrong with rules and regulations; you need them. But we’ve cut more than any administration ever in the history of our country, and we still have a ways to go. So I think between that and the tremendous tax cuts, we’ve really done something.And one other thing I said—and I saw it last night with some of the leaders and the businesspeople—I think I’ve been a cheerleader for our country, and everybody representing a company or a country has to be a cheerleader, or no matter what you do, it’s just not going to work. And the reason I’m a cheerleader is because it’s easy—because I love our country and I think we’re just doing really well.And we look forward to seeing you in America—special place—and where you are is a special place also.Thank you all very much. I appreciate it. (Applause.)MR. SCHWAB: Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. President, for being with us.The World Economic Forum community, who is assembled here, will be certainly—and I quote you from the last piece of your remarks—will be certainly among “the hardworking men and women who do their duty each and every day making this world a better place for everyone.”Thank you very much for being with us.PRESIDENT TRUMP: Thank you. Thank you very much everybody. Thank you. (Applause.) THE PRESIDENT: Thank you very much. Thank you. Please. I want to thank Vice President Pence, along with the many members of my Cabinet here with us today.I also want to thank all of the dedicated professionals—military, civilian, and law enforcement—who devote their lives to serving our nation. In particular, I want to recognize General Dunford and the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff. Thank you, thank you, thank you. (Applause.)In addition, we are honored to be joined by House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, Homeland Security Chairman Mike McCaul, and Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn. Thank you very much. Thank you for being here. Thank you. Thank you. (Applause.)Let me begin by expressing our deepest sympathies and most heartfelt prayers for the victims of the train derailment in Washington State. We are closely monitoring the situation and coordinating with local authorities. It is all the more reason why we must start immediately fixing the infrastructure of the United States.We’re here today to discuss matters of vital importance to us all: America’s security, prosperity, and standing in the world. I want to talk about where we’ve been, where we are now, and, finally, our strategy for where we are going in the years ahead.Over the past 11 months, I have traveled tens of thousands of miles to visit 13 countries. I have met with more than 100 world leaders. I have carried America’s message to a grand hall in Saudi Arabia, a great square in Warsaw, to the General Assembly of the United Nations, and to the seat of democracy on the Korean Peninsula. Everywhere I traveled, it was my highest privilege and greatest honor to represent the American people.Throughout our history, the American people have always been the true source of American greatness. Our people have promoted our culture and promoted our values. Americans have fought and sacrificed on the battlefields all over the world. We have liberated captive nations, transformed former enemies into the best of friends, and lifted entire regions of the planet from poverty to prosperity.Because of our people, America has been among the greatest forces for peace and justice in the history of the world. The American people are generous. You are determined, you are brave, you are strong, and you are wise.When the American people speak, all of us should listen. And just over one year ago, you spoke loud and you spoke clear. On November 8, 2016, you voted to make America great again. (Applause.) You embraced new leadership and very new strategies, and also a glorious new hope. That is why we are here today.But to seize the opportunities of the future, we must first understand the failures of the past. For many years, our citizens watched as Washington politicians presided over one disappointment after another. To many of our leaders—so many who forgot whose voices they were to respect and whose interests they were supposed to defend—our leaders in Washington negotiated disastrous trade deals that brought massive profits to many foreign nations, but sent thousands of American factories, and millions of American jobs, to those other countries.Our leaders engaged in nation-building abroad, while they failed to build up and replenish our nation at home. They undercut and shortchanged our men and women in uniform with inadequate resources, unstable funding, and unclear missions. They failed to insist that our often very wealthy allies pay their fair share for defense, putting a massive and unfair burden on the U.S. taxpayer and our great U.S. military.They neglected a nuclear menace in North Korea; made a disastrous, weak, and incomprehensibly bad deal with Iran; and allowed terrorists such as ISIS to gain control of vast parts of territory all across the Middle East.They put American energy under lock and key. They imposed punishing regulations and crippling taxes. They surrendered our sovereignty to foreign bureaucrats in faraway and distant capitals.And over the profound objections of the American people, our politicians left our borders wide open. Millions of immigrants entered illegally. Millions more were admitted into our country without the proper vetting needed to protect our security and our economy. Leaders in Washington imposed on the country an immigration policy that Americans never voted for, never asked for, and never approved—a policy where the wrong people are allowed into our country and the right people are rejected. American citizens, as usual, have been left to bear the cost and to pick up the tab.On top of everything else, our leaders drifted from American principles. They lost sight of America’s destiny. And they lost their belief in American greatness. As a result, our citizens lost something as well. The people lost confidence in their government and, eventually, even lost confidence in their future.But last year, all of that began to change. The American people rejected the failures of the past. You rediscovered your voice and reclaimed ownership of this nation and its destiny.On January 20th, 2017, I stood on the steps of the Capitol to herald the day the people became the rulers of their nation again. (Applause.) Thank you. Now, less than one year later, I am proud to report that the entire world has heard the news and has already seen the signs. America is coming back, and America is coming back strong.Upon my inauguration, I announced that the United States would return to a simple principle: The first duty of our government is to serve its citizens, many of whom have been forgotten. But they are not forgotten anymore. With every decision and every action, we are now putting America first.We are rebuilding our nation, our confidence, and our standing in the world. We have moved swiftly to confront our challenges, and we have confronted them head-on.We are once again investing in our defense—almost $700 billion, a record, this coming year. We are demanding extraordinary strength, which will hopefully lead to long and extraordinary peace. We are giving our courageous military men and women the support they need and so dearly deserve.We have withdrawn the United States from job-killing deals such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the very expensive and unfair Paris Climate Accord. And on our trip to Asia last month, I announced that we will no longer tolerate trading abuse.We have established strict new vetting procedures to keep terrorists out of the United States, and our vetting is getting tougher each month.To counter Iran and block its path to a nuclear weapon, I sanctioned the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps for its support of terrorism, and I declined to certify the Iran Deal to Congress.Following my trip to the Middle East, the Gulf states and other Muslim-majority nations joined together to fight radical Islamist ideology and terrorist financing. We have dealt ISIS one devastating defeat after another. The coalition to defeat ISIS has now recaptured almost 100 percent of the land once held by these terrorists in Iraq and Syria. Great job. (Applause.) Great job. Really good. Thank you. Thank you. We have a great military. We’re now chasing them wherever they flee, and we will not let them into the United States.In Afghanistan, our troops are no longer undermined by artificial timelines, and we no longer tell our enemies of our plans. We are beginning to see results on the battlefield. And we have made clear to Pakistan that while we desire continued partnership, we must see decisive action against terrorist groups operating on their territory. And we make massive payments every year to Pakistan. They have to help.Our efforts to strengthen the NATO Alliance set the stage for significant increases in member contributions, with tens of billions of dollars more pouring in because I would not allow member states to be delinquent in the payment while we guarantee their safety and are willing to fight wars for them. We have made clear that countries that are immensely wealthy should reimburse the United States for the cost of defending them. This is a major departure from the past, but a fair and necessary one—necessary for our country, necessary for our taxpayer, necessary for our own thought process.Our campaign of maximum pressure on the North Korean regime has resulted in the toughest-ever sanctions. We have united our allies in an unprecedented effort to isolate North Korea. However, there is much more work to do. America and its allies will take all necessary steps to achieve a denuclearization and ensure that this regime cannot threaten the world. (Applause.) Thank you. This situation should have been taken care of long before I got into office, when it was much easier to handle. But it will be taken care of. We have no choice.At home, we are keeping our promises and liberating the American economy. We have created more than 2 million jobs since the election. Unemployment is at a 17-year-low. The stock market is at an all-time high and, just a little while ago, hit yet another all-time high—the 85th time since my election. (Applause.)We have cut 22 regulations for every one new regulation, the most in the history of our country. We have unlocked America’s vast energy resources.As the world watches—and the world is indeed watching—we are days away from passing historic tax cuts for American families and businesses. It will be the biggest tax cut and tax reform in the history of our country. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.And we are seeing the response we fully expected. Economic growth has topped 3 percent for two quarters in a row. GDP growth, which is way ahead of schedule under my administration, will be one of America’s truly greatest weapons.Optimism has surged. Confidence has returned. With this new confidence, we are also bringing back clarity to our thinking. We are reasserting these fundamental truths:A nation without borders is not a nation. (Applause.)A nation that does not protect prosperity at home cannot protect its interests abroad.A nation that is not prepared to win a war is a nation not capable of preventing a war.A nation that is not proud of its history cannot be confident in its future.And a nation that is not certain of its values cannot summon the will to defend them.Today, grounded in these truths, we are presenting to the world our new National Security Strategy. Based on my direction, this document has been in development for over a year. It has the endorsement of my entire Cabinet.Our new strategy is based on a principled realism, guided by our vital national interests, and rooted in our timeless values.This strategy recognizes that, whether we like it or not, we are engaged in a new era of competition. We accept that vigorous military, economic, and political contests are now playing out all around the world.We face rogue regimes that threaten the United States and our allies. We face terrorist organizations, transnational criminal networks, and others who spread violence and evil around the globe.We also face rival powers, Russia and China, that seek to challenge American influence, values, and wealth. We will attempt to build a great partnership with those and other countries, but in a manner that always protects our national interest.As an example, yesterday I received a call from President Putin of Russia thanking our country for the intelligence that our CIA was able to provide them concerning a major terrorist attack planned in St. Petersburg, where many people, perhaps in the thousands, could have been killed. They were able to apprehend these terrorists before the event, with no loss of life. And that’s a great thing, and the way it’s supposed to work. That is the way it’s supposed to work.But while we seek such opportunities of cooperation, we will stand up for ourselves, and we will stand up for our country like we have never stood up before. (Applause.) Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.We know that American success is not a forgone conclusion. It must be earned and it must be won. Our rivals are tough, they’re tenacious, and committed to the long term. But so are we.To succeed, we must integrate every dimension of our national strength, and we must compete with every instrument of our national power.Under the Trump administration, America is gaining wealth, leading to enhanced power—faster than anyone thought—with $6 trillion more in the stock market alone since the election—$6 trillion.With the strategy I am announcing today, we are declaring that America is in the game and America is going to win. (Applause.) Thank you.Our strategy advances four vital national interests. First, we must protect the American people, the homeland, and our great American way of life. This strategy recognizes that we cannot secure our nation if we do not secure our borders. So for the first time ever, American strategy now includes a serious plan to defend our homeland. It calls for the construction of a wall on our southern border; ending chain migration and the horrible visa and lottery programs; closing loopholes that undermine enforcement; and strongly supporting our Border Patrol agents, ICE officers, and Homeland Security personnel. (Applause.)In addition, our strategy calls for us to confront, discredit, and defeat radical Islamic terrorism and ideology and to prevent it from spreading into the United States. And we will develop new ways to counter those who use new domains, such as cyber and social media, to attack our nation or threaten our society.The second pillar of our strategy is to promote American prosperity. For the first time, American strategy recognizes that economic security is national security. Economic vitality, growth, and prosperity at home is absolutely necessary for American power and influence abroad. Any nation that trades away its prosperity for security will end up losing both.That is why this National Security Strategy emphasizes, more than any before, the critical steps we must take to ensure the prosperity of our nation for a long, long time to come.It calls for cutting taxes and rolling back unnecessary regulations. It calls for trade based on the principles of fairness and reciprocity. It calls for firm action against unfair trade practices and intellectual property theft. And it calls for new steps to protect our national security industrial and innovation base.The strategy proposes a complete rebuilding of American infrastructure—our roads, bridges, airports, waterways, and communications infrastructure. And it embraces a future of American energy dominance and self-sufficiency.The third pillar of our strategy is to preserve peace through strength. (Applause.) We recognize that weakness is the surest path to conflict, and unrivaled power is the most certain means of defense. For this reason, our strategy breaks from the damaging defense sequester. We’re going to get rid of that. (Applause.)It calls for a total modernization of our military, and reversing previous decisions to shrink our armed forces—even as threats to national security grew. It calls for streamlining acquisition, eliminating bloated bureaucracy, and massively building up our military, which has the fundamental side benefit of creating millions and millions of jobs.This strategy includes plans to counter modern threats, such as cyber and electromagnetic attacks. It recognizes space as a competitive domain and calls for multi-layered missile defense. (Applause.) This strategy outlines important steps to address new forms of conflict such as economic and political aggression.And our strategy emphasizes strengthening alliances to cope with these threats. It recognizes that our strength is magnified by allies who share principles—and our principles—and shoulder their fair share of responsibility for our common security.Fourth and finally, our strategy is to advance American influence in the world, but this begins with building up our wealth and power at home.America will lead again. We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone, but we will champion the values without apology. We want strong alliances and partnerships based on cooperation and reciprocity. We will make new partnerships with those who share our goals, and make common interests into a common cause. We will not allow inflexible ideology to become an obsolete and obstacle to peace.We will pursue the vision we have carried around the world over this past year—a vision of strong, sovereign, and independent nations that respect their citizens and respect their neighbors; nations that thrive in commerce and cooperation, rooted in their histories and branching out toward their destinies.That is the future we wish for this world, and that is the future we seek in America. (Applause.)With this strategy, we are calling for a great reawakening of America, a resurgence of confidence, and a rebirth of patriotism, prosperity, and pride.And we are returning to the wisdom of our founders. In America, the people govern, the people rule, and the people are sovereign. What we have built here in America is precious and unique. In all of history, never before has freedom reigned, the rule of law prevailed, and the people thrived as we have here for nearly 250 years.We must love and defend it. We must guard it with vigilance and spirit, and, if necessary, like so many before us, with our very lives. And we declare that our will is renewed, our future is regained, and our dreams are restored.Every American has a role to play in this grand national effort. And today, I invite every citizen to take their part in our vital mission. Together, our task is to strengthen our families, to build up our communities, to serve our citizens, and to celebrate American greatness as a shining example to the world.As long as we are proud—and very proud—of who we are, how we got here, and what we are fighting for to preserve, we will not fail.If we do all of this, if we rediscover our resolve and commit ourselves to compete and win again, then together we will leave our children and our grandchildren a nation that is stronger, better, freer, prouder, and, yes, an America that is greater than ever before.God Bless You. Thank you very much. Thank you. (Applause.) PRESIDENT TRUMP: Mr. Secretary General, Mr. President, world leaders, and distinguished delegates: Welcome to New York. It is a profound honor to stand here in my home city, as a representative of the American people, to address the people of the world.As millions of our citizens continue to suffer the effects of the devastating hurricanes that have struck our country, I want to begin by expressing my appreciation to every leader in this room who has offered assistance and aid. The American people are strong and resilient, and they will emerge from these hardships more determined than ever before.Fortunately, the United States has done very well since Election Day last November 8th. The stock market is at an all-time high—a record. Unemployment is at its lowest level in 16 years, and because of our regulatory and other reforms, we have more people working in the United States today than ever before. Companies are moving back, creating job growth the likes of which our country has not seen in a very long time. And it has just been announced that we will be spending almost $700 billion on our military and defense.Our military will soon be the strongest it has ever been. For more than 70 years, in times of war and peace, the leaders of nations, movements, and religions have stood before this assembly. Like them, I intend to address some of the very serious threats before us today but also the enormous potential waiting to be unleashed.We live in a time of extraordinary opportunity. Breakthroughs in science, technology, and medicine are curing illnesses and solving problems that prior generations thought impossible to solve.But each day also brings news of growing dangers that threaten everything we cherish and value. Terrorists and extremists have gathered strength and spread to every region of the planet. Rogue regimes represented in this body not only support terrorists but threaten other nations and their own people with the most destructive weapons known to humanity.Authority and authoritarian powers seek to collapse the values, the systems, and alliances that prevented conflict and tilted the world toward freedom since World War II.International criminal networks traffic drugs, weapons, people; force dislocation and mass migration; threaten our borders; and new forms of aggression exploit technology to menace our citizens.To put it simply, we meet at a time of both of immense promise and great peril. It is entirely up to us whether we lift the world to new heights, or let it fall into a valley of disrepair.We have it in our power, should we so choose, to lift millions from poverty, to help our citizens realize their dreams, and to ensure that new generations of children are raised free from violence, hatred, and fear.This institution was founded in the aftermath of two world wars to help shape this better future. It was based on the vision that diverse nations could cooperate to protect their sovereignty, preserve their security, and promote their prosperity.It was in the same period, exactly 70 years ago, that the United States developed the Marshall Plan to help restore Europe. Those three beautiful pillars—they’re pillars of peace, sovereignty, security, and prosperity.The Marshall Plan was built on the noble idea that the whole world is safer when nations are strong, independent, and free. As President Truman said in his message to Congress at that time, “Our support of European recovery is in full accord with our support of the United Nations. The success of the United Nations depends upon the independent strength of its members.”To overcome the perils of the present and to achieve the promise of the future, we must begin with the wisdom of the past. Our success depends on a coalition of strong and independent nations that embrace their sovereignty to promote security, prosperity, and peace for themselves and for the world.We do not expect diverse countries to share the same cultures, traditions, or even systems of government. But we do expect all nations to uphold these two core sovereign duties: to respect the interests of their own people and the rights of every other sovereign nation. This is the beautiful vision of this institution, and this is foundation for cooperation and success.Strong, sovereign nations let diverse countries with different values, different cultures, and different dreams not just coexist, but work side by side on the basis of mutual respect.Strong, sovereign nations let their people take ownership of the future and control their own destiny. And strong, sovereign nations allow individuals to flourish in the fullness of the life intended by God.In America, we do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone, but rather to let it shine as an example for everyone to watch. This week gives our country a special reason to take pride in that example. We are celebrating the 230th anniversary of our beloved Constitution—the oldest constitution still in use in the world today.This timeless document has been the foundation of peace, prosperity, and freedom for the Americans and for countless millions around the globe whose own countries have found inspiration in its respect for human nature, human dignity, and the rule of law.The greatest in the United States Constitution is its first three beautiful words. They are: “We the people.”Generations of Americans have sacrificed to maintain the promise of those words, the promise of our country, and of our great history. In America, the people govern, the people rule, and the people are sovereign. I was elected not to take power, but to give power to the American people, where it belongs.In foreign affairs, we are renewing this founding principle of sovereignty. Our government’s first duty is to its people, to our citizens—to serve their needs, to ensure their safety, to preserve their rights, and to defend their values.As President of the United States, I will always put America first, just like you, as the leaders of your countries will always, and should always, put your countries first. (Applause.)All responsible leaders have an obligation to serve their own citizens, and the nation-state remains the best vehicle for elevating the human condition.But making a better life for our people also requires us to work together in close harmony and unity to create a more safe and peaceful future for all people.The United States will forever be a great friend to the world, and especially to its allies. But we can no longer be taken advantage of, or enter into a one-sided deal where the United States gets nothing in return. As long as I hold this office, I will defend America’s interests above all else.But in fulfilling our obligations to our own nations, we also realize that it’s in everyone’s interest to seek a future where all nations can be sovereign, prosperous, and secure.America does more than speak for the values expressed in the United Nations Charter. Our citizens have paid the ultimate price to defend our freedom and the freedom of many nations represented in this great hall. America’s devotion is measured on the battlefields where our young men and women have fought and sacrificed alongside of our allies, from the beaches of Europe to the deserts of the Middle East to the jungles of Asia.It is an eternal credit to the American character that even after we and our allies emerged victorious from the bloodiest war in history, we did not seek territorial expansion, or attempt to oppose and impose our way of life on others. Instead, we helped build institutions such as this one to defend the sovereignty, security, and prosperity for all.For the diverse nations of the world, this is our hope. We want harmony and friendship, not conflict and strife. We are guided by outcomes, not ideology. We have a policy of principled realism, rooted in shared goals, interests, and values.That realism forces us to confront a question facing every leader and nation in this room. It is a question we cannot escape or avoid. We will slide down the path of complacency, numb to the challenges, threats, and even wars that we face. Or do we have enough strength and pride to confront those dangers today, so that our citizens can enjoy peace and prosperity tomorrow?If we desire to lift up our citizens, if we aspire to the approval of history, then we must fulfill our sovereign duties to the people we faithfully represent. We must protect our nations, their interests, and their futures. We must reject threats to sovereignty, from the Ukraine to the South China Sea. We must uphold respect for law, respect for borders, and respect for culture, and the peaceful engagement these allow. And just as the founders of this body intended, we must work together and confront together those who threaten us with chaos, turmoil, and terror.The scourge of our planet today is a small group of rogue regimes that violate every principle on which the United Nations is based. They respect neither their own citizens nor the sovereign rights of their countries.If the righteous many do not confront the wicked few, then evil will triumph. When decent people and nations become bystanders to history, the forces of destruction only gather power and strength.No one has shown more contempt for other nations and for the wellbeing of their own people than the depraved regime in North Korea. It is responsible for the starvation deaths of millions of North Koreans, and for the imprisonment, torture, killing, and oppression of countless more.We were all witness to the regime’s deadly abuse when an innocent American college student, Otto Warmbier, was returned to America only to die a few days later. We saw it in the assassination of the dictator’s brother using banned nerve agents in an international airport. We know it kidnapped a sweet 13-year-old Japanese girl from a beach in her own country to enslave her as a language tutor for North Korea’s spies.If this is not twisted enough, now North Korea’s reckless pursuit of nuclear weapons and ballistic missiles threatens the entire world with unthinkable loss of human life.It is an outrage that some nations would not only trade with such a regime, but would arm, supply, and financially support a country that imperils the world with nuclear conflict. No nation on earth has an interest in seeing this band of criminals arm itself with nuclear weapons and missiles.The United States has great strength and patience, but if it is forced to defend itself or its allies, we will have no choice but to totally destroy North Korea. Rocket Man is on a suicide mission for himself and for his regime. The United States is ready, willing and able, but hopefully this will not be necessary. That’s what the United Nations is all about; that’s what the United Nations is for. Let’s see how they do.It is time for North Korea to realize that the denuclearization is its only acceptable future. The United Nations Security Council recently held two unanimous 15-0 votes adopting hard-hitting resolutions against North Korea, and I want to thank China and Russia for joining the vote to impose sanctions, along with all of the other members of the Security Council. Thank you to all involved.But we must do much more. It is time for all nations to work together to isolate the Kim regime until it ceases its hostile behavior.We face this decision not only in North Korea. It is far past time for the nations of the world to confront another reckless regime—one that speaks openly of mass murder, vowing death to America, destruction to Israel, and ruin for many leaders and nations in this room.The Iranian government masks a corrupt dictatorship behind the false guise of a democracy. It has turned a wealthy country with a rich history and culture into an economically depleted rogue state whose chief exports are violence, bloodshed, and chaos. The longest-suffering victims of Iran’s leaders are, in fact, its own people.Rather than use its resources to improve Iranian lives, its oil profits go to fund Hezbollah and other terrorists that kill innocent Muslims and attack their peaceful Arab and Israeli neighbors. This wealth, which rightly belongs to Iran’s people, also goes to shore up Bashar al-Assad’s dictatorship, fuel Yemen’s civil war, and undermine peace throughout the entire Middle East.We cannot let a murderous regime continue these destabilizing activities while building dangerous missiles, and we cannot abide by an agreement if it provides cover for the eventual construction of a nuclear program. (Applause.) The Iran Deal was one of the worst and most one-sided transactions the United States has ever entered into. Frankly, that deal is an embarrassment to the United States, and I don’t think you’ve heard the last of it—believe me.It is time for the entire world to join us in demanding that Iran’s government end its pursuit of death and destruction. It is time for the regime to free all Americans and citizens of other nations that they have unjustly detained. And above all, Iran’s government must stop supporting terrorists, begin serving its own people, and respect the sovereign rights of its neighbors.The entire world understands that the good people of Iran want change, and, other than the vast military power of the United States, that Iran’s people are what their leaders fear the most. This is what causes the regime to restrict Internet access, tear down satellite dishes, shoot unarmed student protestors, and imprison political reformers.Oppressive regimes cannot endure forever, and the day will come when the Iranian people will face a choice. Will they continue down the path of poverty, bloodshed, and terror? Or will the Iranian people return to the nation’s proud roots as a center of civilization, culture, and wealth where their people can be happy and prosperous once again?The Iranian regime’s support for terror is in stark contrast to the recent commitments of many of its neighbors to fight terrorism and halt its financing.In Saudi Arabia early last year, I was greatly honored to address the leaders of more than 50 Arab and Muslim nations. We agreed that all responsible nations must work together to confront terrorists and the Islamist extremism that inspires them.We will stop radical Islamic terrorism because we cannot allow it to tear up our nation, and indeed to tear up the entire world.We must deny the terrorists safe haven, transit, funding, and any form of support for their vile and sinister ideology. We must drive them out of our nations. It is time to expose and hold responsible those countries who support and finance terror groups like al Qaeda, Hezbollah, the Taliban and others that slaughter innocent people.The United States and our allies are working together throughout the Middle East to crush the loser terrorists and stop the reemergence of safe havens they use to launch attacks on all of our people.Last month, I announced a new strategy for victory in the fight against this evil in Afghanistan. From now on, our security interests will dictate the length and scope of military operations, not arbitrary benchmarks and timetables set up by politicians.I have also totally changed the rules of engagement in our fight against the Taliban and other terrorist groups. In Syria and Iraq, we have made big gains toward lasting defeat of ISIS. In fact, our country has achieved more against ISIS in the last eight months than it has in many, many years combined.We seek the de-escalation of the Syrian conflict, and a political solution that honors the will of the Syrian people. The actions of the criminal regime of Bashar al-Assad, including the use of chemical weapons against his own citizens—even innocent children—shock the conscience of every decent person. No society can be safe if banned chemical weapons are allowed to spread. That is why the United States carried out a missile strike on the airbase that launched the attack.We appreciate the efforts of United Nations agencies that are providing vital humanitarian assistance in areas liberated from ISIS, and we especially thank Jordan, Turkey and Lebanon for their role in hosting refugees from the Syrian conflict.The United States is a compassionate nation and has spent billions and billions of dollars in helping to support this effort. We seek an approach to refugee resettlement that is designed to help these horribly treated people, and which enables their eventual return to their home countries, to be part of the rebuilding process.For the cost of resettling one refugee in the United States, we can assist more than 10 in their home region. Out of the goodness of our hearts, we offer financial assistance to hosting countries in the region, and we support recent agreements of the G20 nations that will seek to host refugees as close to their home countries as possible. This is the safe, responsible, and humanitarian approach.For decades, the United States has dealt with migration challenges here in the Western Hemisphere. We have learned that, over the long term, uncontrolled migration is deeply unfair to both the sending and the receiving countries.For the sending countries, it reduces domestic pressure to pursue needed political and economic reform, and drains them of the human capital necessary to motivate and implement those reforms.For the receiving countries, the substantial costs of uncontrolled migration are borne overwhelmingly by low-income citizens whose concerns are often ignored by both media and government.I want to salute the work of the United Nations in seeking to address the problems that cause people to flee from their homes. The United Nations and African Union led peacekeeping missions to have invaluable contributions in stabilizing conflicts in Africa. The United States continues to lead the world in humanitarian assistance, including famine prevention and relief in South Sudan, Somalia, and northern Nigeria and Yemen.We have invested in better health and opportunity all over the world through programs like PEPFAR, which funds AIDS relief; the President’s Malaria Initiative; the Global Health Security Agenda; the Global Fund to End Modern Slavery; and the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative, part of our commitment to empowering women all across the globe.We also thank—(applause)—we also thank the Secretary General for recognizing that the United Nations must reform if it is to be an effective partner in confronting threats to sovereignty, security, and prosperity. Too often the focus of this organization has not been on results, but on bureaucracy and process.In some cases, states that seek to subvert this institution’s noble aims have hijacked the very systems that are supposed to advance them. For example, it is a massive source of embarrassment to the United Nations that some governments with egregious human rights records sit on the U.N. Human Rights Council.The United States is one out of 193 countries in the United Nations, and yet we pay 22 percent of the entire budget and more. In fact, we pay far more than anybody realizes. The United States bears an unfair cost burden, but, to be fair, if it could actually accomplish all of its stated goals, especially the goal of peace, this investment would easily be well worth it.Major portions of the world are in conflict and some, in fact, are going to hell. But the powerful people in this room, under the guidance and auspices of the United Nations, can solve many of these vicious and complex problems.The American people hope that one day soon the United Nations can be a much more accountable and effective advocate for human dignity and freedom around the world. In the meantime, we believe that no nation should have to bear a disproportionate share of the burden, militarily or financially. Nations of the world must take a greater role in promoting secure and prosperous societies in their own regions.That is why in the Western Hemisphere, the United States has stood against the corrupt and destabilizing regime in Cuba and embraced the enduring dream of the Cuban people to live in freedom. My administration recently announced that we will not lift sanctions on the Cuban government until it makes fundamental reforms.We have also imposed tough, calibrated sanctions on the socialist Maduro regime in Venezuela, which has brought a once thriving nation to the brink of total collapse.The socialist dictatorship of Nicolas Maduro has inflicted terrible pain and suffering on the good people of that country. This corrupt regime destroyed a prosperous nation by imposing a failed ideology that has produced poverty and misery everywhere it has been tried. To make matters worse, Maduro has defied his own people, stealing power from their elected representatives to preserve his disastrous rule.The Venezuelan people are starving and their country is collapsing. Their democratic institutions are being destroyed. This situation is completely unacceptable and we cannot stand by and watch.As a responsible neighbor and friend, we and all others have a goal. That goal is to help them regain their freedom, recover their country, and restore their democracy. I would like to thank leaders in this room for condemning the regime and providing vital support to the Venezuelan people.The United States has taken important steps to hold the regime accountable. We are prepared to take further action if the government of Venezuela persists on its path to impose authoritarian rule on the Venezuelan people.We are fortunate to have incredibly strong and healthy trade relationships with many of the Latin American countries gathered here today. Our economic bond forms a critical foundation for advancing peace and prosperity for all of our people and all of our neighbors.I ask every country represented here today to be prepared to do more to address this very real crisis. We call for the full restoration of democracy and political freedoms in Venezuela. (Applause.)The problem in Venezuela is not that socialism has been poorly implemented, but that socialism has been faithfully implemented. (Applause.) From the Soviet Union to Cuba to Venezuela, wherever true socialism or communism has been adopted, it has delivered anguish and devastation and failure. Those who preach the tenets of these discredited ideologies only contribute to the continued suffering of the people who live under these cruel systems.America stands with every person living under a brutal regime. Our respect for sovereignty is also a call for action. All people deserve a government that cares for their safety, their interests, and their wellbeing, including their prosperity.In America, we seek stronger ties of business and trade with all nations of good will, but this trade must be fair and it must be reciprocal.For too long, the American people were told that mammoth multinational trade deals, unaccountable international tribunals, and powerful global bureaucracies were the best way to promote their success. But as those promises flowed, millions of jobs vanished and thousands of factories disappeared. Others gamed the system and broke the rules. And our great middle class, once the bedrock of American prosperity, was forgotten and left behind, but they are forgotten no more and they will never be forgotten again.While America will pursue cooperation and commerce with other nations, we are renewing our commitment to the first duty of every government: the duty of our citizens. This bond is the source of America’s strength and that of every responsible nation represented here today.If this organization is to have any hope of successfully confronting the challenges before us, it will depend, as President Truman said some 70 years ago, on the “independent strength of its members.” If we are to embrace the opportunities of the future and overcome the present dangers together, there can be no substitute for strong, sovereign, and independent nations—nations that are rooted in their histories and invested in their destinies; nations that seek allies to befriend, not enemies to conquer; and most important of all, nations that are home to patriots, to men and women who are willing to sacrifice for their countries, their fellow citizens, and for all that is best in the human spirit.In remembering the great victory that led to this body’s founding, we must never forget that those heroes who fought against evil also fought for the nations that they loved.Patriotism led the Poles to die to save Poland, the French to fight for a free France, and the Brits to stand strong for Britain.Today, if we do not invest ourselves, our hearts, and our minds in our nations, if we will not build strong families, safe communities, and healthy societies for ourselves, no one can do it for us.We cannot wait for someone else, for faraway countries or far-off bureaucrats—we can’t do it. We must solve our problems, to build our prosperity, to secure our futures, or we will be vulnerable to decay, domination, and defeat.The true question for the United Nations today, for people all over the world who hope for better lives for themselves and their children, is a basic one: Are we still patriots? Do we love our nations enough to protect their sovereignty and to take ownership of their futures? Do we revere them enough to defend their interests, preserve their cultures, and ensure a peaceful world for their citizens?One of the greatest American patriots, John Adams, wrote that the American Revolution was “effected before the war commenced. The Revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people.”That was the moment when America awoke, when we looked around and understood that we were a nation. We realized who we were, what we valued, and what we would give our lives to defend. From its very first moments, the American story is the story of what is possible when people take ownership of their future.The United States of America has been among the greatest forces for good in the history of the world, and the greatest defenders of sovereignty, security, and prosperity for all.Now we are calling for a great reawakening of nations, for the revival of their spirits, their pride, their people, and their patriotism.History is asking us whether we are up to the task. Our answer will be a renewal of will, a rediscovery of resolve, and a rebirth of devotion. We need to defeat the enemies of humanity and unlock the potential of life itself.Our hope is a word and—world of proud, independent nations that embrace their duties, seek friendship, respect others, and make common cause in the greatest shared interest of all: a future of dignity and peace for the people of this wonderful Earth.This is the true vision of the United Nations, the ancient wish of every people, and the deepest yearning that lives inside every sacred soul.So let this be our mission, and let this be our message to the world: We will fight together, sacrifice together, and stand together for peace, for freedom, for justice, for family, for humanity, and for the almighty God who made us all.Thank you. God bless you. God bless the nations of the world. And God bless the United States of America. Thank you very much. (Applause.) TRUMP: Thank you, everybody. Thank you very much. I am thrilled to be here. Thrilled.(APPLAUSE)And if you think that was an easy trip, you’re wrong. But I am thrilled.(LAUGHTER)19th Boy Scout Jamboree, wow, and to address such a tremendous group. Boy, you have a lot of people here. The press will say it’s about 200 people.(LAUGHTER)It looks like about 45,000 people. You set a record today.(APPLAUSE)You set a record. That’s a great honor, believe me.Tonight we put aside all of the policy fights in Washington, D.C. you’ve been hearing about with the fake news and all of that. We’re going to put that…(APPLAUSE)We’re going to put that aside. And instead we’re going to talk about success, about how all of you amazing young Scouts can achieve your dreams, what to think of, what I’ve been thinking about. You want to achieve your dreams, I said, who the hell wants to speak about politics when I’m in front of the Boy Scouts? Right?(APPLAUSE)There are many great honors that come with the job of being president of the United States. But looking out at this incredible gathering of mostly young patriots. Mostly young. I’m especially proud to speak to you as the honorary president of the Boy Scouts of America.(APPLAUSE)CROWD: USA! USA! USA!TRUMP: You are the young people of character, integrity who will serve as leaders of our communities and uphold the sacred values of our nation.I want to thank Boy Scouts President Randall Stephenson, chief Scout executive Michael Surbaugh, Jamboree Chairman Ralph de la Vega and the thousands of volunteers who made this a life-changing experience for all of you. And when they asked me to be here, I said absolutely yes.(APPLAUSE)Finally—and we can’t forgot these people—I especially want to salute the moms and the dads and troop leaders who are here tonight.(APPLAUSE) Thank you for making scouting possible. Thank you, mom and dad, troop leaders.When you volunteer for the Boy Scouts you are not only shaping young lives, you are shaping the future of America.(APPLAUSE)The United States has no better citizens than its Boy Scouts.(APPLAUSE)No better.(APPLAUSE)The values, traditions and skills you learn here will serve you throughout your lives. And just as importantly, they will serve your families, your cities, and in the future and in the present will serve your country.(APPLAUSE)The Scouts believe in putting America first.(APPLAUSE)You know, I go to Washington and I see all these politicians, and I see the swamp, and it’s not a good place. In fact, today, I said we ought to change it from the word “swamp” to the word “cesspool” or perhaps to the word “sewer.”(APPLAUSE)But it’s not good. Not good. And I see what’s going on. And believe me, I’d much rather be with you, that I can tell you.(APPLAUSE)I’ll tell you the reason that I love this, and the reason that I really wanted to be here, is because as president, I rely on former Boy Scouts every single day. And so do the American people.It’s amazing how many Boy Scouts we have at the highest level of our great government. Many of my top advisers in the White House were Scouts. Ten members of my cabinet were Scouts. Can you believe that? Ten.(APPLAUSE)Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is not only a Boy Scout, he is your former national president.(APPLAUSE)The vice president of the United States, Mike Pence—a good guy—was a Scout, and it meant so much to him.(APPLAUSE)Some of you here tonight might even have camped out in this yard when Mike was the governor of Indiana, but the scouting was very, very important.And by the way, where are our Indiana scouts tonight?(APPLAUSE)I wonder if the television cameras will follow you? They don’t doing that when they see these massive crowds. They don’t like doing that.Hi, folks.(APPLAUSE)There’s a lot of love in this big, beautiful place. A lot of love. And a lot of love for our country. And a lot of love for our country.Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke is here tonight.Come here, Ryan.(APPLAUSE)Ryan is an Eagle Scout from Big Sky Country in Montana.(APPLAUSE)Pretty good.And by the way, he is doing a fantastic job. He makes sure that we leave our national parks and federal lands better than we found them in the best scouting tradition.So thank you very much, Ryan.(APPLAUSE)Secretary of Energy Rick Perry of Texas, an Eagle Scout from the great state.(APPLAUSE)The first time he came to the National Jamboree was in 1964. He was very young then. And Rick told me just a little while ago, it totally changed his life.So, Rick, thank you very much for being here. And we’re doing—we’re doing a lot with energy.(APPLAUSE) And very soon, Rick, we will be an energy exporter. Isn’t that nice? An energy exporter.(APPLAUSE)In other words, we’ll be selling our energy instead of buying it from everybody all over the globe. So that’s good.(APPLAUSE)We will be energy dominant.And I’ll tell you what, the folks in West Virginia who were so nice to me, boy, have we kept our promise. We are going on and on. So we love West Virginia. We want to thank you.Where’s West Virginia by the way?(APPLAUSE)Thank you.Secretary Tom Price is also here today. Dr. Price still lives the Scout oath, helping to keep millions of Americans strong and healthy as our secretary of Health and Human Services. And he’s doing a great job. And hopefully he’s going to gets the votes tomorrow to start our path toward killing this horrible thing known as Obamacare that’s really hurting us.(APPLAUSE)CROWD: USA! USA! USA!TRUMP: By the way, are you going to get the votes? He better get them. He better get them. Oh, he better. Otherwise I’ll say, “Tom, you’re fired.” I’ll get somebody.(APPLAUSE)He better get Senator Capito to vote for it. He better get the other senators to vote for it. It’s time.You know, after seven years of saying repeal and replace Obamacare, we have a chance to now do it. They better do it. Hopefully they’ll do it.As we can see just by looking at our government, in America, Scouts lead the way. And another thing I’ve noticed—and I’ve noticed it all my life—there is a tremendous spirit with being a Scout, more so than almost anything I can think of. So whatever is going on, keep doing it. It’s incredible to watch, believe me.(APPLAUSE)Each of these leaders will tell that you their road to American success—and you have to understand—their American success, and they are a great, great story, was paved with the patriotic American values and traditions they learned in the Boy Scouts. And some day, many years from now, when you look back on all of the adventures in your lives you will be able to say the same, I got my start as a Scout, just like these incredibly great people that are doing such a good job for our country. So that’s going to happen.(APPLAUSE)Boy Scout values are American values. And great Boy Scouts become great, great Americans.(APPLAUSE)As the Scout law says, a scout is trustworthy, loyal—we could use some more loyalty I will tell that you that.(CROWD CHANTING)That was very impressive. You’ve heard that before. But here you learn the rewards of hard work and perseverance, never, ever give up. Never quit. Persevere. Never, ever quit. You learn the satisfaction of building a roaring campfire, reaching a mountain summit or earning a merit badge after mastering a certain skill. There’s no better feeling than an achievement that you’ve earned with your own sweat, tears, resolve, hard work. There’s nothing like it. Do you agree with that?(APPLAUSE)I’m waving to people back there so small I can’t even see them. Man, this is a lot of people. Turn those cameras back there, please. That is so incredible.By the way, what do you think the chances are that this incredible massive crowd, record setting, is going to be shown on television tonight? One percent or zero?(APPLAUSE)The fake media will say, “President Trump spoke”—you know what is—“President Trump spoke before a small crowd of Boy Scouts today.” That’s some—that is some crowd. Fake media. Fake news.Thank you. And I’m honored by that. By the way, all of you people that can’t even see you, so thank you. I hope you can hear.Through scouting you also learned to believe in yourself—so important—to have confidence in your ability and to take responsibility for your own life. When you face down new challenges—and you will have plenty of them—develop talents you never thought possible, and lead your teammates through daring trials, you discover that you can handle anything. And you learn it by being a Scout. It’s great.(APPLAUSE) You can do anything. You can be anything you want to be. But in order to succeed, you must find out what you love to do. You have to find your passion, no matter what they tell you. If you don’t—I love you too. I don’t know. Nice guy.(APPLAUSE)Hey, what am I going to do? He sounds like a nice person. He—he, he, he. I do. I do love you.(CROWD CHANTING)By the way, just a question, did President Obama ever come to a Jamboree?(APPLAUSE)And we’ll be back. We’ll be back. The answer is no. But we’ll be back.In life, in order to be successful—and you people are well on the road to success—you have to find out what makes you excited, what makes you want to get up each morning and go to work? You have to find it. If you love what you do and dedicate yourself to your work, then you will gain momentum? And look, you have to. You need the word “momentum.” You will gain that momentum. And each success will create another success. The word “momentum.”I’ll tell you a story that’s very interesting for me. When I was young there was a man named William Levitt. You have some here. You have some in different states. Anybody ever hear of Levittown?(APPLAUSE)And he was a very successful man, became unbelievable—he was a home builder, became an unbelievable success, and got more and more successful. And he’d build homes, and at night he’d go to these major sites with teams of people, and he’d scour the sites for nails, and sawdust and small pieces of wood, and they cleaned the site, so when the workers came in the next morning, the sites would be spotless and clean, and he did it properly. And he did this for 20 years, and then he was offered a lot of money for his company, and he sold his company, for a tremendous amount of money, at the time especially. This is a long time ago. Sold his company for a tremendous amount of money.And he went out and bought a big yacht, and he had a very interesting life. I won’t go any more than that, because you’re Boy Scouts so I’m not going to tell you what he did.(CROWD CHANTING)Should I tell you? Should I tell you?(APPLAUSE)You’re Boy Scouts, but you know life. You know life.So look at you. Who would think this is the Boy Scouts, right? So he had a very, very interesting life, and the company that bought his company was a big conglomerate, and they didn’t know anything about building homes, and they didn’t know anything about picking up the nails and the sawdust and selling it, and the scraps of wood. This was a big conglomerate based in New York City.And after about a 10-year period, there were losing a lot with it. It didn’t mean anything to them. And they couldn’t sell it. So they called William Levitt up, and they said, would you like to buy back your company, and he said, yes, I would. He so badly wanted it. He got bored with this life of yachts, and sailing, and all of the things he did in the south of France and other places. You won’t get bored, right? You know, truthfully, you’re workers. You’ll get bored too, believe me. Of course having a few good years like that isn’t so bad.But what happened is he bought back his company, and he bought back a lot of empty land, and he worked hard at getting zoning, and he worked hard on starting to develop, and in the end he failed, and he failed badly, lost all of his money. He went personally bankrupt, and he was now much older. And I saw him at a cocktail party. And it was very sad because the hottest people in New York were at this party. It was the party of Steve Ross—Steve Ross, who was one of the great people. He came up and discovered, really founded <em>Time Warner</em>, and he was a great guy. He had a lot of successful people at the party.And I was doing well, so I got invited to the party. I was very young. And I go in, but I’m in the real estate business, and I see a hundred people, some of whom I recognize, and they’re big in the entertainment business.And I see sitting in the corner was a little old man who was all by himself. Nobody was talking to him. I immediately recognized that that man was the once great William Levitt, of Levittown, and I immediately went over. I wanted to talk to him more than the Hollywood, show business, communications people.So I went over and talked to him, and I said, “Mr. Levitt, I’m Donald Trump.” He said, “I know.” I said, “Mr. Levitt, how are you doing?” He goes, “Not well, not well at all.” And I knew that. But he said, “Not well at all.” And he explained what was happening and how bad it’s been and how hard it’s been. And I said, “What exactly happened? Why did this happen to you? You’re one of the greats ever in our industry. Why did this happen to you?”And he said, “Donald, I lost my momentum. I lost my momentum.” A word you never hear when you’re talking about success when some of these guys that never made 10 cents, they’re on television giving you things about how you’re going to be successful, and the only thing they ever did was a book and a tape. But I tell you—I’ll tell you, it was very sad, and I never forgot that moment.And I thought about it, and it’s exactly true. He lost his momentum, meaning he took this period of time off, long, years, and then when he got back, he didn’t have that same momentum.In life, I always tell this to people, you have to know whether or not you continue to have the momentum. And if you don’t have it, that’s OK. Because you’re going to go on, and you’re going to learn and you’re going to do things that are great. But you have to know about the word “momentum.”But the big thing, never quit, never give up; do something you love. When you do something you love as a Scout, I see that you love it. But when you do something that you love, you’ll never fail. What you’re going to do is give it a shot again and again and again. You’re ultimately going to be successful.And remember this, you’re not working. Because when you’re doing something that you love, like I do—of course I love my business, but this is a little bit different. Who thought this was going to happen. We’re, you know, having a good time. We’re doing a good job.(APPLAUSE)Doing a good job. But when you do something that you love, remember this, it’s not work. So you’ll work 24/7. You’re going to work all the time. And at the end of the year you’re not really working. You don’t think of it as work. When you’re not doing something that you like or when you’re forced into do something that you really don’t like, that’s called work, and it’s hard work, and tedious work.So as much as you can do something that you love, work hard and never ever give up, and you’re going to be tremendously successful, tremendously successful.(APPLAUSE)Now, with that, I have to tell you our economy is doing great. Our stock market has picked up since the election, November 8th—do we remember that day? Was that a beautiful day?(APPLAUSE)What a day.Do you remember that famous night on television, November 8th where they said, these dishonest people, where they said, there is no path to victory for Donald Trump. They forgot about the forgotten people.By the way, they’re not forgetting about the forgotten people anymore. They’re going crazy trying to figure it out, but I told them, far too late; it’s far too late.But you remember that incredible night with the maps, and the Republicans are red and the Democrats are blue, and that map was so red it was unbelievable. And they didn’t know what to say.(APPLAUSE) And you know, we have a tremendous disadvantage in the Electoral College. Popular vote is much easier. We have—because New York, California, Illinois, you have to practically run the East Coast. And we did. We won Florida. We won South Carolina. We won North Carolina. We won Pennsylvania.(APPLAUSE)We won and won. So when they said, there is no way to victory; there is no way to 270. You know I went to Maine four times because it’s one vote, and we won. We won. One vote. I went there because I kept hearing we’re at 269. But then Wisconsin came in. Many, many years. Michigan came in.(APPLAUSE)So—and we worked hard there. You know, my opponent didn’t work hard there, because she was told…(BOOING)She was told she was going to win Michigan, and I said, well, wait a minute. The car industry is moving to Mexico. Why is she going to move—she’s there. Why are they allowing it to move? And by the way, do you see those car industry—do you see what’s happening? They’re coming back to Michigan. They’re coming back to Ohio. They’re starting to peel back in.(APPLAUSE)And we go to Wisconsin, now, Wisconsin hadn’t been won in many, many years by a Republican. But we go to Wisconsin, and we had tremendous crowds. And I’d leave these massive crowds, I’d say, why are we going to lose this state?The polls, that’s also fake news. They’re fake polls. But the polls are saying—but we won Wisconsin.(APPLAUSE)So I have to tell you, what we did, in all fairness, is an unbelievable tribute to you and all of the other millions and millions of people that came out and voted for make America great again.(APPLAUSE)And I’ll tell you what, we are indeed making America great again.CROWD: USA! USA! USA!TRUMP: And I’ll tell you what, we are indeed making America great again. What’s going on is incredible.(APPLAUSE)We had the best jobs report in 16 years. The stock market on a daily basis is hitting an all-time high.We’re going to be bringing back very soon trillions of dollars from companies that can’t get their money back into this country, and that money is going to be used to help rebuild America. We’re doing things that nobody ever thought was possible, and we’ve just started. It’s just the beginning, believe me.(APPLAUSE)You know, in the Boy Scouts you learn right from wrong, correct? You learn to contribute to your communities, to take pride in your nation, and to seek out opportunities to serve. You pledge to help other people at all times.(APPLAUSE)In the Scout oath, you pledge on your honor to do your best and to do your duty to God and your country.(APPLAUSE)And by the way, under the Trump administration you’ll be saying “Merry Christmas” again when you go shopping, believe me.(APPLAUSE)Merry Christmas.They’ve been downplaying that little beautiful phrase. You’re going to be saying “Merry Christmas” again, folks.(APPLAUSE)But the words “duty,” “country” and “God” are beautiful words. In other words, basically what you’re doing is you’re pledging to be a great American patriot.(APPLAUSE)For more than a century that is exactly what our Boy Scouts have been. Last year you gave more than 15 million hours of service to helping people in your communities. Incredible. That’s an incredible stat.(APPLAUSE)All of you here tonight will contribute more than 100,000 hours of service by the end of this Jamboree—100,000.(APPLAUSE)When natural disaster strikes, when people face hardship, when the beauty and glory of our outdoor spaces must be restored and taken care of, America turns to the Boy Scouts because we know that the Boy Scouts never ever, ever let us down.(APPLAUSE)Just like you know you can count on me, we know we can count on you, because we know the values that you live by.(APPLAUSE)Your values are the same values that have always kept America strong, proud and free.And by the way, do you see the billions and billions and billions of additional money that we’re putting back into our military? Billions of dollars.(APPLAUSE)New planes, new ships, great equipment for our people that are so great to us. We love our vets. We love our soldiers. And we love our police, by the way.(APPLAUSE)Firemen, police. We love our police. Those are all special people. Uniformed services.Two days ago I traveled to Norfolk, Virginia to commission an American aircraft carrier into the fleet of the United States Navy.(APPLAUSE)It’s the newest, largest and most advanced aircraft carrier anywhere in the world, and it’s named for an Eagle Scout—the USS Gerald R. Ford.(APPLAUSE)Everywhere it sails that great Scout’s name will be feared and revered, because that ship will be a symbol of American power, prestige and strength.(APPLAUSE)Our nation honors President Gerald R. Ford today because he lived his life the scouting way. Boy Scouts celebrate American patriots, especially the brave members of our Armed Forces. Thank you very much.(APPLAUSE)Thank you. Thank you.(APPLAUSE)American hearts are warmed every year when we read about Boy Scouts placing thousands and thousands of flags next to veterans’ grave sites all across the country. By honoring our heroes, you help to ensure that their memory never, ever dies. You should take great pride in the example you set for every citizen of our country to follow.(APPLAUSE)Generations of American Boy Scouts have sworn the same oath and lived according to the same law. You inherit a noble American tradition. And as you embark on your lives, never cease to be proud of you who you are and the principles you hold dear and stand by. Wear your values as your badge of honor. What you’ve done few have done before you. What you’ve done is incredible. What you’ve done is admired by all. So I want to congratulate you, Boy Scouts.(APPLAUSE)Let your scouting oath guide your path from this day forward. Remember your duty, honor your history, take care of the people God put into your life, and love and cherish your great country.(APPLAUSE)You are very special people. You’re special in the lives of America. You’re special to me. But if you do what we say, I promise you that you will live scouting’s adventure every single day of your life, and you will win, win, win, and help people in doing so.(APPLAUSE)Your lives will have meaning, and purpose and joy. You will become leaders, and you will inspire others to achieve the dreams they once thought were totally impossible. Things that you said could never, ever happen are already happening for you. And if you do these things, and if you refuse to give in to doubt or to fear, then you will help to make America great again, you will be proud of yourself, be proud of the uniform you wear, and be proud of the country you love.(APPLAUSE)CROWD: USA! USA! USA!TRUMP: And never, ever forget, America is proud of you.(APPLAUSE)This is a very, very special occasion for me. I’ve known so many Scouts over the years. Winners. I’ve known so many great people. They’ve been taught so well, and they love the heritage. But this is very special for me.And I just want to end by saying, very importantly, God bless you. God bless the Boy Scouts. God Bless the United States of America. Go out, have a great time in life, compete, and go out and show me that there is nobody, nobody like a Boy Scout.(APPLAUSE)Thank you very much, everybody. (APPLAUSE)Thank you very much.(APPLAUSE)Thank you.(APPLAUSE)Thank you very much(APPLAUSE) THE PRESIDENT: Thank you, everybody. Thank you very much. (Applause.) How are you?Well I want to thank everybody on stage. They are really a terrific team. We have some of the real winners in the audience, too, that I can tell you—some great, great people.I want to thank Vice President Pence. As always, he’s right there and he has really been a help to this administration. We have some big things happening today, and we have some very big things happening over the next month, and I guess probably I can say over the next eight years. I suspect I can say that. (Applause.)It’s wonderful to be here with so many pioneers and visionaries from America’s energy industry—great industry. I want to thank the leaders of our great energy companies for joining us today and for supporting our efforts to bring true wealth and prosperity to our people. That’s true. Come on, give yourself a hand. (Applause.)You deserve it. You deserve it. You’ve gone through eight years of hell, and actually I could say even a little bit more than that. You deserve it.I also want to express our sincere gratitude to the labor union leaders and members who have joined us today. Thank you, fellas. Thank you, thank you. (Applause.) Your workers embody the skill, grit and courage that has always been the true source of American strength. They are great people. They break through rock walls, mine the depths of the earth, and reach through the ocean floor, to bring every ounce of energy into our homes and commerce and into our lives. Our nation salutes you. You’re brave and you are great workers. Thank you very much. Thank you, fellas. (Applause.)Before turning to the topic at hand, I want to provide a brief update on two crucial votes taking place this afternoon on the House Floor—very important. These bills are vital to public safety and national security, and I want to thank Chairman Bob Goodlatte for his efforts. Bob has been working very hard and really for a long time, but we got it going.First, the House will be voting on Kate’s Law—legislation named for Kate Steinle, who was killed by an illegal immigrant with five prior deportations and lots of bad things on his record.The second is the No Sanctuary for Criminals Act, which blocks federal grants to cities that release dangerous criminal aliens back into the streets, including the vicious and disgusting and horrible MS-13 gang members. And we’re getting them out. We are getting them out. They’re going—fast. (Applause.)General Kelly and his whole group—they’ve gotten rid of 6,000 so far. We’re about 50 percent there, and we’re actually liberating towns. Like on long Island, where I grew up—we’re liberating towns. Those people are so happy to see our guys, and our guys are a lot tougher than the MS-13 characters. That I can tell you. Liberation. (Applause.)I’m calling on all lawmakers to put the safety of American families first. And let’s pass these bills through the House, through the Senate, and send them to my desk. I will give you the fastest approval, the fastest signature that you have ever seen. Right, Mike? We will get that signed so fast. (Applause.) So when we get back, the first thing I’m going to do is how did we do on the vote? I expect good things; otherwise I probably wouldn’t be talking about it to be honest with you. I’d just sort of low-key it a little bit. (Laughter.) I don’t like losing. I don’t like losing. (Laughter.) Neither do you folks. Every member of Congress should vote to save American lives. Many great members of Congress are here with us this afternoon—some great people, some great, great people. Thank you very much. Not only are they working with us on border security, but they share our desire to unleash American energy.I especially want to thank Secretary Perry for his tremendous leadership in this department. He has really done a terrific job, and he’s also a cheerleader—he’s really a cheerleader. I watched that in Texas. The thing that I loved about him—he was always saying how great Texas was. And if you don’t say it, I don’t know. You got to say it, right? And you’re doing it right now with energy.SECRETARY PERRY: Ain’t bragging if you can do it.THE PRESIDENT: That’s true.Along with Secretary of the Interior Ryan Zinke and EPA Administrator Scott Pruitt. And we’ve been through our battles, Scott. Not with each other, with the world. And now the world is starting to say I think they’re right. (Laughter.) They’ll find out. We have no doubt. But all three of them strongly believe in putting America first, which is what I believe in, which is why I got elected. It’s called Make America Great Again—that’s what we’re doing—Make America Great Again.We’re here today to usher in a new American energy policy—one that unlocks million and millions of jobs and trillions of dollars in wealth. For over 40 years, America was vulnerable to foreign regimes that used energy as an economic weapon. Americans’ quality of life was diminished by the idea that energy resources were too scarce to support our people. We always thought that, and actually at the time it was right to think. We didn’t think we had this tremendous wealth under our feet. Many of us remember the long gas lines and the constant claims that the world was running out of oil and natural gas.Americans were told that our nation could only solve this energy crisis by imposing draconian restrictions on energy production. But we now know that was all a big, beautiful myth. It was fake. Don’t we love that term, “fake”? What we’ve learned about fake over the last little while—fake news, CNN. Fake. (Laughter and Applause.) Whoops, their camera just went off. (Laughter.) Okay, you can come back. I won’t say—I promise I won’t say anything more about you. I see that red light go off, I say, whoa. The truth is that we have near-limitless supplies of energy in our country. Powered by new innovation and technology, we are now on the cusp of a true energy revolution.Our country is blessed with extraordinary energy abundance, which we didn’t know of, even five years ago and certainly ten years ago. We have nearly 100 years’ worth of natural gas and more than 250 years’ worth of clean, beautiful coal. We are a top producer of petroleum and the number-one producer of natural gas. We have so much more than we ever thought possible. We are really in the driving seat. And you know what? We don’t want to let other countries take away our sovereignty and tell us what to do and how to do it. That’s not going to happen. (Applause.) With these incredible resources, my administration will seek not only American energy independence that we’ve been looking for so long, but American energy dominance.And we’re going to be an exporter—exporter. (Applause.) We will be dominant. We will export American energy all over the world, all around the globe. These energy exports will create countless jobs for our people, and provide true energy security to our friends, partners, and allies all across the globe.But this full potential can only be realized when government promotes energy development—that’s this guy right here, and he’ll do it better than anybody—instead of obstructing it like the Democrats. They obstruct it. But we get through it. We cannot have obstruction. We have to get out and do our job better and faster than anybody in the world, certainly when it comes to one of our great assets—energy. This vast energy wealth does not belong to the government. It belongs to the people of the United States of America. (Applause.) Yet, for the past eight years, the federal government imposed massive job-killing barriers to American energy development.Since my very first day in office, I have been moving at record pace to cancel these regulations and to eliminate the barriers to domestic energy production, like never before. Job-killing regulations are being removed and vital infrastructure projects are being approved at a level that they’ve never seen before. As you all know, I approved the Keystone XL Pipeline and the Dakota Access Pipeline in my first week. Thousands of jobs—tremendous things are happening. And, by the way, I thought I’d take a lot of heat. I didn’t take any heat. I approved them and that was it. I figured we’d have all sorts of protests. We didn’t have anything.But I have to do—whether it’s protesting or not, I have to do what’s right. But people celebrate those two transactions, as opposed to protesting. But sometimes you have to go out and just do it, and you find out. Whatever happens, happens. But you have to be right for the American people. (Applause.) Thank you.I’m dramatically reducing restrictions on the development of natural gas. I cancelled the moratorium on a new coal leasing—and you know what was happening—the new coal leasing on federal lands, it was being so terribly restricted. And now with Ryan and with a group, it’s going to be open, and the land will be left in better shape than it is right now. Is that right? Better shape. (Applause.)We have finally ended the war on coal. And I am proud to report that Corsa Coal, here with us today, just opened a brand-new coal mine in the state of Pennsylvania, the first one in many, many, many years. Corsa, stand up. Come on. (Applause.) Congratulations. Congratulations. Employing a lot of people, and we are putting the coal miners back to work just like I promised—just like I promised when I went through Ohio and West Virginia, Wyoming and all of the different places. And I see Bob back there. Congratulations, Bob. He’s in great shape, right? You in good shape, Bob? Right from the beginning. Good. You just take care of yourself, all right?We’re ending intrusive EPA regulations that kill jobs, hurt family farmers and ranchers, and raise the price of energy so quickly and so substantially.In order to protect American jobs, companies and workers, we’ve withdrawn the United States from the one-sided Paris Climate Accord. (Applause.)And I won’t get into it, but believe me, that really put this country at a disadvantage. Number one, we weren’t playing on the same field. It kicked in for us, and it doesn’t kick in for others. The money that we had to pay was enormous. It was not even close. And maybe we’ll be back into it someday, but it will be on better terms. It will be on fair terms—not on terms where we’re the people that don’t know what we’re doing.So we’ll see what happens. But I will tell you we’re proud of it. And when I go around, there are so many people that say thank you. You saved the sovereignty of our country. You saved our wealth because we would have a hard time getting to this newfound wealth. And that’s not going to happen with our country. (Applause.)Today, I am proudly announcing six brand-new initiatives to propel this new era of American energy dominance. First, we will begin to revive and expand our nuclear energy sector—which I’m so happy about—which produces clean, renewable and emissions-free energy. A complete review of U.S. nuclear energy policy will help us find new ways to revitalize this crucial energy resource. And I know you’re very excited about that, Rick.Second, the Department of the Treasury will address barriers to the financing of highly efficient, overseas coal energy plants. Ukraine already tells us they need millions and millions of metric tons right now. There are many other places that need it, too. And we want to sell it to them, and to everyone else all over the globe who need it.Third, my administration has just approved the construction of a new petroleum pipeline to Mexico, which will further boost American energy exports, and that will go right under the wall, right? It’s going under, right? (Laughter and applause.) Have it go down a little deeper in that one section. You know, a little like this. Right under the wall.Fourth, just today, a major U.S. company, Sempra Energy, signed an agreement to begin negotiations for the sale of more American natural gas to South Korea. And, as you know, the leaders of South Korea are coming to the White House today, and we’ve got a lot of discussion to do. But we will also be talking about them buying energy from the United States of America, and I’m sure they’ll like to do it. They need it. Thank you. (Applause.)Fifth, the United States Department of Energy is announcing today that it will approve two long-term applications to export additional natural gas from the Lake Charles LNG terminal in Louisiana. It’s going to be a big deal. It’s a great announcement.Finally, in order to unlock more energy from the 94 percent of offshore land closed to development, under the previous administration, so much of our land was closed to development. We’re opening it up, the right areas, but we’re opening it up—we’re creating a new offshore oil and gas leasing program. America will be allowed to access the vast energy wealth located right off our shores. And this is all just the beginning—believe me.The golden era of American energy is now underway. And I’ll go a step further: The golden era of America is now underway. Believe me. (Applause.)And you’re all going to be a part of it in creating this exciting new future. We will bring new opportunity to the heartland, new prosperity to our inner cities, and new infrastructure all across our nation. When it comes to the future of America’s energy needs, we will find it, we will dream it, and we will build it.American energy will power our ships, our planes and our cities. American hands will bend the steel and pour the concrete that brings this energy into our homes and that exports this incredible, newfound energy all around the world. And American grit will ensure that what we dream, and what we build, will truly be second to none. We will be number one again all the way. We’re going to make America great again.Thank you, God bless you, and God bless America. Thank you. (Applause.) Mr. Speaker, Mr. Vice President, Members of Congress, the First Lady of the United States, and Citizens of America:Tonight, as we mark the conclusion of our celebration of Black History Month, we are reminded of our Nation's path toward civil rights and the work that still remains. Recent threats targeting Jewish Community Centers and vandalism of Jewish cemeteries, as well as last week's shooting in Kansas City, remind us that while we may be aNation divided on policies, we are a country that stands united in condemning hate and evil in all its forms.Each American generation passes the torch of truth, liberty and justice –- in an unbroken chain all the way down to the present.That torch is now in our hands. And we will use it to light up the world. I am here tonight to deliver a message of unity and strength, and it is a message deeply delivered from myheart.A new chapter of American Greatness is now beginning.A new national pride is sweeping across our Nation.And a new surge of optimism is placing impossible dreams firmly within our grasp.What we are witnessing today is the Renewal of the American Spirit.Our allies will find that America is once again ready tolead.All the nations of the world -- friend or foe -- will find that America is strong, America is proud, and America is free.In 9 years, the United States will celebrate the 250th anniversary of our founding -- 250 years since the day we declared our Independence.It will be one of the great milestones in the history of the world.But what will America look like as we reach our 250th year? What kind of country will we leave for our children?I will not allow the mistakes of recent decades past to define the course of our future.For too long, we've watched our middle class shrink as we've exported our jobs and wealth to foreign countries.We've financed and built one global project after another, but ignored the fates of our children in the inner cities of Chicago, Baltimore, Detroit -- and so many other places throughout our land.We've defended the borders of other nations, while leaving our own borders wide open, for anyone to cross -- and for drugs to pour in at a now unprecedented rate.And we've spent trillions of dollars overseas, while our infrastructure at home has so badly crumbled.Then, in 2016, the earth shifted beneath our feet. The rebellion started as a quiet protest, spoken by families of all colors and creeds -– families who just wanted a fair shot for their children, and a fair hearing for their concerns.But then the quiet voices became a loud chorus -- as thousands of citizens now spoke out together, from cities small and large, all across our country.Finally, the chorus became an earthquake – and the people turned out by the tens of millions, and they were all united by one very simple, but crucial demand, that America must put its own citizens first ... because only then, can we truly MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN.Dying industries will come roaring back to life. Heroic veterans will get the care they so desperately need.Our military will be given the resources its brave warriors so richly deserve.Crumbling infrastructure will be replaced with new roads, bridges, tunnels, airports and railways gleaming across our beautiful land.Our terrible drug epidemic will slow down and ultimately, stop.And our neglected inner cities will see a rebirth of hope, safety, and opportunity.Above all else, we will keep our promises to the American people.It's been a little over a month since my inauguration, and I want to take this moment to update the Nation on the progress I've made in keeping those promises.Since my election, Ford, Fiat-Chrysler, General Motors, Sprint, Softbank, Lockheed, Intel, Walmart, and many others, haveannounced that they will invest billions of dollars in theUnited States and will create tens of thousands of new American jobs.The stock market has gained almost three trillion dollars in value since the election on November 8th, a record. We've saved taxpayers hundreds of millions of dollars by bringing down the price of the fantastic new F-35 jet fighter, and will be saving billions more dollars on contracts all across our Government. We have placed a hiring freeze on non-military and non-essential Federal workers.We have begun to drain the swamp of government corruption by imposing a 5 year ban on lobbying by executive branch officials –- and a lifetime ban on becoming lobbyists for a foreign government.We have undertaken a historic effort to eliminate job‑crushing regulations, creating a deregulation task force inside of every Government agency; imposing a new rule which mandates that for every 1 new regulation, 2 old regulations must be eliminated; and stopping a regulation that threatens the future and livelihoods of our great coal miners.We have cleared the way for the construction of the Keystone and Dakota Access Pipelines -- thereby creating tens ofthousands of jobs -- and I've issued a new directive that new American pipelines be made with American steel.We have withdrawn the United States from the job-killing Trans-Pacific Partnership.With the help of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, we have formed a Council with our neighbors in Canada to help ensure that women entrepreneurs have access to the networks, markets and capital they need to start a business and live out their financial dreams.To protect our citizens, I have directed the Department of Justice to form a Task Force on Reducing Violent Crime.I have further ordered the Departments of Homeland Security and Justice, along with the Department of State and the Director of National Intelligence, to coordinate an aggressive strategy to dismantle the criminal cartels that have spread across our Nation.We will stop the drugs from pouring into our country and poisoning our youth -- and we will expand treatment for those who have become so badly addicted.At the same time, my Administration has answered the pleas of the American people for immigration enforcement and border security. By finally enforcing our immigration laws, we will raise wages, help the unemployed, save billions of dollars, and make our communities safer for everyone. We want all Americans to succeed –- but that can't happen in an environment of lawless chaos. We must restore integrity and the rule of law to our borders.For that reason, we will soon begin the construction of a great wall along our southern border.As we speak, we are removing gang members, drug dealers andcriminals that threaten our communities and prey on our citizens. Bad ones are going out as I speak tonight and as Ihave promised.To any in Congress who do not believe we should enforce our laws, I would ask you this question: what would you say to the American family that loses their jobs, their income, or a loved one, because America refused to uphold its laws and defend its borders?Our obligation is to serve, protect, and defend the citizens of the United States. We are also taking strong measures to protect our Nation from Radical Islamic Terrorism.According to data provided by the Department of Justice, the vast majority of individuals convicted for terrorism-related offenses since 9/11 came here from outside of our country. We have seen the attacks at home -– from Boston to San Bernardino to the Pentagon and yes, even the World Trade Center.We have seen the attacks in France, in Belgium, in Germany and all over the world.It is not compassionate, but reckless, to allow uncontrolled entry from places where proper vetting cannot occur. Those given the high honor of admission to the UnitedStates should support this country and love its peopleand its values.We cannot allow a beachhead of terrorism to form inside America -- we cannot allow our Nation to become a sanctuary for extremists.That is why my Administration has been working on improved vetting procedures, and we will shortly take new steps to keep our Nation safe -- and to keep out those who would do us harm.As promised, I directed the Department of Defense to develop a plan to demolish and destroy ISIS -- a network of lawless savages that have slaughtered Muslims and Christians, and men, women, and children of all faiths and beliefs. We will work with our allies, including our friends and allies in the Muslim world, to extinguish this vile enemy from our planet.I have also imposed new sanctions on entities and individuals who support Iran's ballistic missile program, and reaffirmed our unbreakable alliance with the State of Israel.Finally, I have kept my promise to appoint a Justice to the United States Supreme Court -- from my list of 20 judges -- who will defend our Constitution. I am honored to have Maureen Scalia with us in the gallery tonight. Her late, great husband, Antonin Scalia, will forever be a symbol of American justice. To fill his seat, we have chosen Judge Neil Gorsuch, a man of incredible skill, and deep devotion to the law. He was confirmed unanimously to the Court of Appeals, and I am asking the Senate to swiftly approve his nomination.Tonight, as I outline the next steps we must take as a country, we must honestly acknowledge the circumstances we inherited.Ninety-four million Americans are out of the labor force.Over 43 million people are now living in poverty, and over 43 million Americans are on food stamps.More than 1 in 5 people in their prime working years are not working.We have the worst financial recovery in 65 years.In the last 8 years, the past Administration has put on more new debt than nearly all other Presidents combined.We've lost more than one-fourth of our manufacturing jobs since NAFTA was approved, and we've lost 60,000 factories since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001.Our trade deficit in goods with the world last year was nearly $800 billion dollars.And overseas, we have inherited a series of tragic foreign policy disasters.Solving these, and so many other pressing problems, will require us to work past the differences of party. It will require us to tap into the American spirit that has overcome every challenge throughout our long and storied history.But to accomplish our goals at home and abroad, we must restart the engine of the American economy -- making it easier for companies to do business in the United States, and much harder for companies to leave.Right now, American companies are taxed at one of the highest rates anywhere in the world.My economic team is developing historic tax reform that will reduce the tax rate on our companies so they can compete and thrive anywhere and with anyone. At the same time, we will provide massive tax relief for the middle class.We must create a level playing field for American companies and workers.Currently, when we ship products out of America, many other countries make us pay very high tariffs and taxes -- but when foreign companies ship their products into America, we charge them almost nothing.I just met with officials and workers from a great American company, Harley-Davidson. In fact, they proudly displayed five of their magnificent motorcycles, made in the USA, on the front lawn of the White House.At our meeting, I asked them, how are you doing, how is business? They said that it's good. I asked them further how they are doing with other countries, mainly international sales. They told me -- without even complaining because they have been mistreated for so long that they have become used to it -- that it is very hard to do business with other countries because they tax our goods at such a high rate. They said that in one case another country taxed their motorcycles at 100 percent.They weren't even asking for change. But I am.I believe strongly in free trade but it also has to be FAIR TRADE.The first Republican President, Abraham Lincoln, warned that the "abandonment of the protective policy by the American Government [will] produce want and ruin among our people."Lincoln was right -- and it is time we heeded his words. Iam not going to let America and its great companies and workers, be taken advantage of anymore.I am going to bring back millions of jobs. Protecting our workers also means reforming our system of legal immigration. The current, outdated system depresses wages for our poorest workers, and puts great pressure on taxpayers.Nations around the world, like Canada, Australia and many others –- have a merit-based immigration system. It is a basic principle that those seeking to enter a country ought to be able to support themselves financially. Yet, in America, we do not enforce this rule, straining the very public resources that our poorest citizens rely upon. According to the National Academy of Sciences, our current immigration system costs America's taxpayers many billions of dollars a year.Switching away from this current system of lower-skilled immigration, and instead adopting a merit-based system, will have many benefits: it will save countless dollars, raise workers' wages, and help struggling families –- including immigrant families –- enter the middle class.Another Republican President, Dwight D. Eisenhower, initiated the last truly great national infrastructure program –- the building of the interstate highway system. The time has come for a new program of national rebuilding.America has spent approximately six trillion dollars in theMiddle East, all this while our infrastructure at home is crumbling. With this six trillion dollars we could have rebuilt our country –- twice. And maybe even three times if we had people who had the ability to negotiate.To launch our national rebuilding, I will be asking the Congress to approve legislation that produces a $1 trillion investment in the infrastructure of the United States -- financed through both public and private capital –- creating millions of new jobs.This effort will be guided by two core principles: Buy American, and Hire American.Tonight, I am also calling on this Congress to repeal and replace Obamacare with reforms that expand choice, increase access, lower costs, and at the same time, provide better Healthcare.Mandating every American to buy government-approved health insurance was never the right solution for America. The way to make health insurance available to everyone is to lower the cost of health insurance, and that is what we will do.Obamacare premiums nationwide have increased by double and triple digits. As an example, Arizona went up 116 percent last year alone. Governor Matt Bevin of Kentucky just said Obamacare is failing in his State -- it is unsustainable and collapsing.One third of counties have only one insurer on the exchanges –- leaving many Americans with no choice at all.Remember when you were told that you could keep your doctor, and keep your plan?We now know that all of those promises have been broken.Obamacare is collapsing –- and we must act decisively to protect all Americans. Action is not a choice –- it is a necessity.So I am calling on all Democrats and Republicans in the Congress to work with us to save Americans from this imploding Obamacare disaster.Here are the principles that should guide the Congress as we move to create a better healthcare system for all Americans:First, we should ensure that Americans with pre-existing conditions have access to coverage, and that we have a stable transition for Americans currently enrolled in the healthcare exchanges.Secondly, we should help Americans purchase their own coverage, through the use of tax credits and expanded Health Savings Accounts –- but it must be the plan they want, not the plan forced on them by the Government.Thirdly, we should give our great State Governors the resources and flexibility they need with Medicaid to make sure no one is left out.Fourthly, we should implement legal reforms that protect patients and doctors from unnecessary costs that drive up the price of insurance – and work to bring down the artificially high price of drugs and bring them down immediately.Finally, the time has come to give Americans the freedom to purchase health insurance across State lines –- creating a truly competitive national marketplace that will bring cost way down and provide far better care.Everything that is broken in our country can be fixed. Every problem can be solved. And every hurting family can find healing, and hope.Our citizens deserve this, and so much more –- so why not join forces to finally get it done? On this and so many other things, Democrats and Republicans should get together and unite for the good of our country, and for the good of the American people.My administration wants to work with members in both parties to make childcare accessible and affordable, to help ensure new parents have paid family leave, to invest in women's health, and to promote clean air and clear water, and to rebuild our military and our infrastructure.True love for our people requires us to find common ground, to advance the common good, and to cooperate on behalf of every American child who deserves a brighter future.An incredible young woman is with us this evening who should serve as an inspiration to us all.Today is Rare Disease day, and joining us in the gallery is a Rare Disease Survivor, Megan Crowley. Megan was diagnosed with Pompe Disease, a rare and serious illness, when she was 15months old. She was not expected to live past 5.On receiving this news, Megan's dad, John, fought with everything he had to save the life of his precious child. He founded a company to look for a cure, and helped develop the drug that saved Megan's life. Today she is 20 years old -- and a sophomore at Notre Dame.Megan's story is about the unbounded power of a father's love for a daughter.But our slow and burdensome approval process at the Food and Drug Administration keeps too many advances, like the one that saved Megan's life, from reaching those in need.If we slash the restraints, not just at the FDA but across our Government, then we will be blessed with far more miracles like Megan.In fact, our children will grow up in a Nation of miracles.But to achieve this future, we must enrich the mind –- and the souls –- of every American child.Education is the civil rights issue of our time.I am calling upon Members of both parties to pass an education bill that funds school choice for disadvantaged youth, including millions of African-American and Latino children. These families should be free to choose the public, private, charter, magnet, religious or home school that is right for them.Joining us tonight in the gallery is a remarkable woman, Denisha Merriweather. As a young girl, Denisha struggled in school and failed third grade twice. But then she was able to enroll in a private center for learning, with the help of a tax credit scholarship program. Today, she is the first in her family to graduate, not just from high school, but from college. Later this year she will get her masters degree in social work.We want all children to be able to break the cycle of poverty just like Denisha.But to break the cycle of poverty, we must also break the cycle of violence.The murder rate in 2015 experienced its largest single-year increase in nearly half a century.In Chicago, more than 4,000 people were shot last year alone –- and the murder rate so far this year has been even higher.This is not acceptable in our society.Every American child should be able to grow up in a safe community, to attend a great school, and to have access to a high-paying job.But to create this future, we must work with –- not against -– the men and women of law enforcement.We must build bridges of cooperation and trust –- not drive the wedge of disunity and division.Police and sheriffs are members of our community. They are friends and neighbors, they are mothers and fathers, sons and daughters – and they leave behind loved ones every day who worry whether or not they'll come home safe and sound.We must support the incredible men and women of law enforcement.And we must support the victims of crime.I have ordered the Department of Homeland Security to create an office to serve American Victims. The office is called VOICE –- Victims Of Immigration Crime Engagement. We are providing a voice to those who have been ignored by our media, and silenced by special interests.Joining us in the audience tonight are four very brave Americans whose government failed them.Their names are Jamiel Shaw, Susan Oliver, Jenna Oliver, and Jessica Davis.Jamiel's 17-year-old son was viciously murdered by an illegal immigrant gang member, who had just been released from prison. Jamiel Shaw Jr. was an incredible young man, with unlimited potential who was getting ready to go to college where he would have excelled as a great quarterback. But he never got the chance. His father, who is in the audience tonight, has become a good friend of mine.Also with us are Susan Oliver and Jessica Davis. Their husbands –- Deputy Sheriff Danny Oliver and Detective Michael Davis –- were slain in the line of duty in California. They were pillars of their community. These brave men were viciously gunned down by an illegal immigrant with a criminal record and two prior deportations.Sitting with Susan is her daughter, Jenna. Jenna: I want you to know that your father was a hero, and that tonight you have the love of an entire country supporting you and praying for you.To Jamiel, Jenna, Susan and Jessica: I want you to know –- we will never stop fighting for justice. Your loved ones will never be forgotten, we will always honor their memory.Finally, to keep America Safe we must provide the men and women of the United States military with the tools they need to prevent war and –- if they must –- to fight and to win.I am sending the Congress a budget that rebuilds the military, eliminates the Defense sequester, and calls for one of the largest increases in national defense spending in American history.My budget will also increase funding for our veterans.Our veterans have delivered for this Nation –- and now we must deliver for them.The challenges we face as a Nation are great. But our people are even greater.And none are greater or braver than those who fight for America in uniform.We are blessed to be joined tonight by Carryn Owens, the widow of a U.S. Navy Special Operator, Senior Chief William "Ryan" Owens. Ryan died as he lived: a warrior, and a hero –- battling against terrorism and securing our Nation.I just spoke to General Mattis, who reconfirmed that, and Iquote, "Ryan was a part of a highly successful raid that generated large amounts of vital intelligence that will lead to many more victories in the future against our enemies." Ryan's legacy is etched into eternity. For as the Bible teaches us, there is no greater act of love than to lay down one's life for one's friends. Ryan laid down his life for his friends, for his country, and for our freedom –- we will never forget him.To those allies who wonder what kind of friend America will be, look no further than the heroes who wear our uniform.Our foreign policy calls for a direct, robust and meaningful engagement with the world. It is American leadership based on vital security interests that we share with our allies across the globe.We strongly support NATO, an alliance forged through the bonds of two World Wars that dethroned fascism, and a Cold War that defeated communism.But our partners must meet their financial obligations.And now, based on our very strong and frank discussions, they are beginning to do just that.We expect our partners, whether in NATO, in the Middle East, or the Pacific –- to take a direct and meaningful role in both strategic and military operations, and pay their fair share of the cost.We will respect historic institutions, but we will also respect the sovereign rights of nations.Free nations are the best vehicle for expressing the will of the people –- and America respects the right of all nations to chart their own path. My job is not to represent the world. My job is to represent the United States of America. But we know that America is better off, when there is less conflict -- not more.We must learn from the mistakes of the past –- we have seen the war and destruction that have raged across our world.The only long-term solution for these humanitarian disasters is to create the conditions where displaced persons can safely return home and begin the long process of rebuilding.America is willing to find new friends, and to forge new partnerships, where shared interests align. We want harmony and stability, not war and conflict.We want peace, wherever peace can be found. America is friends today with former enemies. Some of our closest allies, decades ago, fought on the opposite side of these World Wars. This history should give us all faith in the possibilities for a better world.Hopefully, the 250th year for America will see a world that is more peaceful, more just and more free.On our 100th anniversary, in 1876, citizens from across our Nation came to Philadelphia to celebrate America's centennial. At that celebration, the country's builders and artists and inventors showed off their creations.Alexander Graham Bell displayed his telephone for the first time.Remington unveiled the first typewriter. An early attempt was made at electric light.Thomas Edison showed an automatic telegraph and an electric pen.Imagine the wonders our country could know in America's 250th year.Think of the marvels we can achieve if we simply set free the dreams of our people.Cures to illnesses that have always plagued us are not too much to hope.American footprints on distant worlds are not too big a dream.Millions lifted from welfare to work is not too much to expect.And streets where mothers are safe from fear -- schools where children learn in peace -- and jobs where Americans prosper and grow -- are not too much to ask.When we have all of this, we will have made America greater than ever before. For all Americans.This is our vision. This is our mission.But we can only get there together.We are one people, with one destiny.We all bleed the same blood.We all salute the same flag.And we are all made by the same God.And when we fulfill this vision; when we celebrate our 250 years of glorious freedom, we will look back on tonight as when this new chapter of American Greatness began.The time for small thinking is over. The time for trivial fights is behind us.We just need the courage to share the dreams that fill our hearts.The bravery to express the hopes that stir our souls.And the confidence to turn those hopes and dreams to action.From now on, America will be empowered by our aspirations, not burdened by our fears –-inspired by the future, not bound by the failures of the past –-and guided by our vision, not blinded by our doubts.I am asking all citizens to embrace this Renewal of the American Spirit. I am asking all members of Congress to join me in dreaming big, and bold and daring things for our country. And I am asking everyone watching tonight to seize this moment and --Believe in yourselves.Believe in your future.And believe, once more, in America.Thank you, God bless you, and God Bless these UnitedStates. Chief Justice Roberts, President Carter, President Clinton, President Bush, President Obama, fellow Americans, and people of the world: thank you.We, the citizens of America, are now joined in a great national effort to rebuild our country and to restore its promise for all of our people.Together, we will determine the course of America and the world for years to come.We will face challenges. We will confront hardships. But we will get the job done.Every four years, we gather on these steps to carry out the orderly and peaceful transfer of power, and we are grateful to President Obama and First Lady Michelle Obama for their gracious aid throughout this transition. They have been magnificent.Today’s ceremony, however, has very special meaning. Because today we are not merely transferring power from one Administration to another, or from one party to another – but we are transferring power from Washington, D.C. and giving it back to you, the American People.For too long, a small group in our nation’s Capital has reaped the rewards of government while the people have borne the cost.Washington flourished – but the people did not share in its wealth.Politicians prospered – but the jobs left, and the factories closed.The establishment protected itself, but not the citizens of our country.Their victories have not been your victories; their triumphs have not been your triumphs; and while they celebrated in our nation’s Capital, there was little to celebrate for struggling families all across our land.That all changes – starting right here, and right now, because this moment is your moment: it belongs to you.It belongs to everyone gathered here today and everyone watching all across America.This is your day. This is your celebration.And this, the United States of America, is your country.What truly matters is not which party controls our government, but whether our government is controlled by the people.January 20th 2017, will be remembered as the day the people became the rulers of this nation again.The forgotten men and women of our country will be forgotten no longer.Everyone is listening to you now.You came by the tens of millions to become part of a historic movement the likes of which the world has never seen before.At the center of this movement is a crucial conviction: that a nation exists to serve its citizens.Americans want great schools for their children, safe neighborhoods for their families, and good jobs for themselves.These are the just and reasonable demands of a righteous public.But for too many of our citizens, a different reality exists: Mothers and children trapped in poverty in our inner cities; rusted-out factories scattered like tombstones across the landscape of our nation; an education system, flush with cash, but which leaves our young and beautiful students deprived of knowledge; and the crime and gangs and drugs that have stolen too many lives and robbed our country of so much unrealized potential.This American carnage stops right here and stops right now.We are one nation – and their pain is our pain. Their dreams are our dreams; and their success will be our success. We share one heart, one home, and one glorious destiny.The oath of office I take today is an oath of allegiance to all Americans.For many decades, we’ve enriched foreign industry at the expense of American industry;Subsidized the armies of other countries while allowing for the very sad depletion of our military;We've defended other nation’s borders while refusing to defend our own;And spent trillions of dollars overseas while America's infrastructure has fallen into disrepair and decay.We’ve made other countries rich while the wealth, strength, and confidence of our country has disappeared over the horizon.One by one, the factories shuttered and left our shores, with not even a thought about the millions upon millions of American workers left behind.The wealth of our middle class has been ripped from their homes and then redistributed across the entire world.But that is the past. And now we are looking only to the future.We assembled here today are issuing a new decree to be heard in every city, in every foreign capital, and in every hall of power.From this day forward, a new vision will govern our land.From this moment on, it’s going to be America First.Every decision on trade, on taxes, on immigration, on foreign affairs, will be made to benefit American workers and American families.We must protect our borders from the ravages of other countries making our products, stealing our companies, and destroying our jobs. Protection will lead to great prosperity and strength.I will fight for you with every breath in my body – and I will never, ever let you down.America will start winning again, winning like never before.We will bring back our jobs. We will bring back our borders. We will bring back our wealth. And we will bring back our dreams.We will build new roads, and highways, and bridges, and airports, and tunnels, and railways all across our wonderful nation.We will get our people off of welfare and back to work – rebuilding our country with American hands and American labor.We will follow two simple rules: Buy American and Hire American.We will seek friendship and goodwill with the nations of the world – but we do so with the understanding that it is the right of all nations to put their own interests first.We do not seek to impose our way of life on anyone, but rather to let it shine as an example for everyone to follow.We will reinforce old alliances and form new ones – and unite the civilized world against Radical Islamic Terrorism, which we will eradicate completely from the face of the Earth.At the bedrock of our politics will be a total allegiance to the United States of America, and through our loyalty to our country, we will rediscover our loyalty to each other.When you open your heart to patriotism, there is no room for prejudice.The Bible tells us, “how good and pleasant it is when God’s people live together in unity.”We must speak our minds openly, debate our disagreements honestly, but always pursue solidarity.When America is united, America is totally unstoppable.There should be no fear – we are protected, and we will always be protected.We will be protected by the great men and women of our military and law enforcement and, most importantly, we are protected by God.Finally, we must think big and dream even bigger.In America, we understand that a nation is only living as long as it is striving.We will no longer accept politicians who are all talk and no action – constantly complaining but never doing anything about it.The time for empty talk is over.Now arrives the hour of action.Do not let anyone tell you it cannot be done. No challenge can match the heart and fight and spirit of America.We will not fail. Our country will thrive and prosper again.We stand at the birth of a new millennium, ready to unlock the mysteries of space, to free the Earth from the miseries of disease, and to harness the energies, industries and technologies of tomorrow.A new national pride will stir our souls, lift our sights, and heal our divisions.It is time to remember that old wisdom our soldiers will never forget: that whether we are black or brown or white, we all bleed the same red blood of patriots, we all enjoy the same glorious freedoms, and we all salute the same great American Flag.And whether a child is born in the urban sprawl of Detroit or the windswept plains of Nebraska, they look up at the same night sky, they fill their heart with the same dreams, and they are infused with the breath of life by the same almighty Creator.So to all Americans, in every city near and far, small and large, from mountain to mountain, and from ocean to ocean, hear these words:You will never be ignored again.Your voice, your hopes, and your dreams, will define our American destiny. And your courage and goodness and love will forever guide us along the way.Together, We Will Make America Strong Again.We Will Make America Wealthy Again.We Will Make America Proud Again.We Will Make America Safe Again.And, Yes, Together, We Will Make America Great Again. Thank you, God Bless You, And God Bless America.